MICHIGAN PLANNING ENABLING ACT
Act 33 of 2008
AN ACT to codify the laws regarding and to provide for county, township, city, and village
planning; to provide for the creation, organization, powers, and duties of local planning
commissions; to provide for the powers and duties of certain state and local governmental
officers and agencies; to provide for the regulation and subdivision of land; and to repeal acts
and parts of acts.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
The People of the State of Michigan enact:
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
125.3801 Short title.
Sec. 1.
This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Michigan planning enabling act".
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3803 Definitions.
Sec. 3.
As used in this act:
(a) "Chief administrative official" means the manager or other highest nonelected
administrative official of a city or village.
(b) "Chief elected official" means the mayor of a city, the president of a village, the
supervisor of a township, or, subject to section 5, the chairperson of the county board of
commissioners of a county.
(c) "County board of commissioners", subject to section 5, means the elected county board
of commissioners, except that, as used in sections 39 and 41, county board of commissioners
means 1 of the following:
(i) A committee of the county board of commissioners, if the county board of
commissioners delegates its powers and duties under this act to the committee.
(ii) The regional planning commission for the region in which the county is located, if the
county board of commissioners delegates its powers and duties under this act to the regional
planning commission.
(d) "Ex officio member", in reference to a planning commission, means a member, with full
voting rights unless otherwise provided by charter, who serves on the planning commission by
virtue of holding another office, for the term of that other office. 
(e) "Legislative body" means the county board of commissioners of a county, the board of
trustees of a township, or the council or other elected governing body of a city or village.
(f) "Local unit of government" or "local unit" means a county or municipality.
(g) "Master plan" means either of the following:
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 1 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(i) As provided in section 81(1), any plan adopted or amended before September 1, 2008
under a planning act repealed under section 85. 
(ii) Any plan adopted or amended under this act. This includes, but is not limited to, a plan
prepared by a planning commission authorized by this act and used to satisfy the requirement
of section 203(1) of the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3203,
regardless of whether it is entitled a master plan, basic plan, county plan, development plan,
guide plan, land use plan, municipal plan, township plan, plan, or any other term. 
(h) "Municipality" or "municipal" means or refers to a city, village, or township.
(i) "Planning commission" means either of the following, as applicable:
(i) A planning commission created pursuant to section 11(1).
(ii) A planning commission retained pursuant to section 81(2) or (3), subject to the
limitations on the application of this act provided in section 81(2) and (3).
(j) "Planning jurisdiction" for a county, city, or village refers to the areas encompassed by
the legal boundaries of that county, city, or village, subject to section 31(1). Planning
jurisdiction for a township refers to the areas encompassed by the legal boundaries of that
township outside of the areas of incorporated villages and cities, subject to section 31(1).
(k) "Population" means the population according to the most recent federal decennial census
or according to a special census conducted under section 7 of the Glenn Steil state revenue
sharing act of 1971, 1971 PA 140, MCL 141.907, whichever is the more recent.
(l) "Public transportation agency" means a governmental entity that operates or is
authorized to operate intercity or local commuter passenger rail service in this state or a public
transit authority created under 1 of the following acts:
(i) The metropolitan transportation authorities act of 1967, 1967 PA 204, MCL 124.401 to
124.426.
(ii) The public transportation authority act, 1986 PA 196, MCL 124.451 to 124.479. 
(iii) 1963 PA 55, MCL 124.351 to 124.359.
(iv) The home rule city act, 1909 PA 279, MCL 117.1 to 117.38.
(v) The revenue bond act of 1933, 1933 PA 94, MCL 141.101 to 141.140.
(vi) The charter township act, 1947 PA 359, MCL 42.1 to 42.34.
(vii) The urban cooperation act of 1967, 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to 124.512.
(m) "Public transportation facility" means that term as defined in section 2 of the
metropolitan transportation authorities act of 1967, 1967 PA 204, MCL 124.402.
(n) "Street" means a street, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, alley, viaduct, or other
public way intended for use by motor vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, and other legal users.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 134, Imd. Eff. Aug. 2, 2010 ;-- Am. 2010, Act
306, Imd. Eff. Dec. 17, 2010 
125.3805 Assignment of power or duty to county officer or body.
Sec. 5.
The assignment of a power or duty under this act to a county officer or body is subject to
1966 PA 293, MCL 45.501 to 45.521, or 1973 PA 139, MCL 45.551 to 45.573, in a county
organized under 1 of those acts.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 2 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
125.3807 Master plan; adoption, amendment, and implementation by local government;
purpose.
Sec. 7.
(1) A local unit of government may adopt, amend, and implement a master plan as provided
in this act.
(2) The general purpose of a master plan is to guide and accomplish, in the planning
jurisdiction and its environs, development that satisfies all of the following criteria:
(a) Is coordinated, adjusted, harmonious, efficient, and economical.
(b) Considers the character of the planning jurisdiction and its suitability for particular uses,
judged in terms of such factors as trends in land and population development.
(c) Will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote public health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare.
(d) Includes, among other things, promotion of or adequate provision for 1 or more of the
following:
(i) A system of transportation to lessen congestion on streets and provide for safe and
efficient movement of people and goods by motor vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, and other
legal users.
(ii) Safety from fire and other dangers.
(iii) Light and air.
(iv) Healthful and convenient distribution of population.
(v) Good civic design and arrangement and wise and efficient expenditure of public funds.
(vi) Public utilities such as sewage disposal and water supply and other public
improvements.
(vii) Recreation. 
(viii) The use of resources in accordance with their character and adaptability.
(ix) A range of housing types, costs, affordability, attainability, ages, and other
characteristics, including single- and multiple-family dwellings, to serve the housing demands
of a diverse population.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 134, Imd. Eff. Aug. 2, 2010 ;-- Am. 2024, Act
153, Eff. Apr. 2, 2025 
ARTICLE II.
PLANNING COMMISSION CREATION AND ADMINISTRATION
125.3811 Planning commission; creation; adoption of ordinance by local unit of
government; notice required; exception; adoption of charter provision by city or home
rule village; effect of repeal of planning act; continued exercise or transfer of powers and
duties of zoning board or zoning commission.
Sec. 11.
(1) A local unit of government may adopt an ordinance creating a planning commission with
powers and duties provided in this act. The planning commission of a local unit of government
shall be officially called "the planning commission", even if a charter, ordinance, or resolution
uses a different name such as "plan board" or "planning board".
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 3 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(2) Within 14 days after a local unit of government adopts an ordinance under subsection
(1) creating a planning commission, the clerk of the local unit shall transmit notice of the
adoption to the planning commission of the county where the local unit is located. However, if
there is not a county planning commission or if the local unit adopting the ordinance is a
county, notice shall be transmitted to the regional planning commission engaged in planning
for the region within which the local unit is located. Notice under this subsection is not
required when a planning commission created before the effective date of this act continues in
existence under this act, but is required when an ordinance governing or creating a planning
commission is amended or superseded under section 81(2)(b) or (3)(b).
(3) If, after the effective date of this act, a city or home rule village adopts a charter
provision providing for a planning commission, the charter provision shall be implemented by
an ordinance that conforms to this act. Section 81(2) provides for the continuation of a
planning commission created by a charter provision adopted before the effective date of this
act.
(4) Section 81(3) provides for the continuation of a planning commission created under a
planning act repealed under section 85.
(5) Section 83 provides for the continued exercise by a planning commission, or the transfer
to a planning commission, of the powers and duties of a zoning board or zoning commission.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3813 Planning commission; effect of township ordinance; number of days; petition
requesting submission of ordinance to electors; filing; petition subject to Michigan
election law; violation.
Sec. 13.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a township ordinance creating a planning commission under
this act shall take effect 63 days after the ordinance is published by the township board in a
newspaper having general circulation in the township.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), before a township ordinance creating a planning commission
takes effect, a petition may be filed with the township clerk requesting the submission of the
ordinance to the electors residing in the unincorporated portion of the township for their
approval or rejection. The petition shall be signed by a number of qualified and registered
electors residing in the unincorporated portion of the township equal to not less than 8% of the
total vote cast for all candidates for governor, at the last preceding general election at which a
governor was elected. If such a petition is filed, the ordinance shall not take effect until
approved by a majority of the electors residing in the unincorporated portion of the township
voting thereon at the next regular or special election that allows reasonable time for proper
notices and printing of ballots or at any special election called for that purpose, as determined
by the township board. The township board shall specify the language of the ballot question.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply if the planning commission created by the ordinance is the
successor to an existing zoning commission or zoning board as provided for under section 301
of the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3301.
(4) If a township board does not on its own initiative adopt an ordinance under this act
creating a planning commission, a petition may be filed with the township clerk requesting the
township board to adopt such an ordinance. The petition shall be signed by a number of
qualified and registered electors as provided in subsection (2). If such a petition is filed, the
township board, at its first meeting following the filing shall submit the question to the
electors of the township in the same manner as provided under subsection (2).
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 4 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(5) A petition under this section, including the circulation and signing of the petition, is
subject to section 488 of the Michigan election law, 1954 PA 116, MCL 168.488. A person
who violates a provision of the Michigan election law, 1954 PA 116, MCL 168.1 to 168.992,
applicable to a petition described in this section is subject to the penalties prescribed for that
violation in the Michigan election law, 1954 PA 116, MCL 168.1 to 168.992.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3815 Planning commission; membership; appointment; terms; vacancy;
representation; qualifications; ex-officio members; board serving as planning
commission; removal of member; conditions; conflict of interest; additional
requirements.
Sec. 15.
(1) In a municipality, the chief elected official shall appoint members of the planning
commission, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members of the legislative body
elected and serving. In a county, the county board of commissioners shall determine the
method of appointment of members of the planning commission by resolution of a majority of
the full membership of the county board.
(2) A city, village, or township planning commission shall consist of 5, 7, or 9 members. A
county planning commission shall consist of 5, 7, 9, or 11 members. Members of a planning
commission other than ex officio members under subsection (5) shall be appointed for 3-year
terms. However, of the members of the planning commission, other than ex officio members,
first appointed, a number shall be appointed to 1-year or 2-year terms such that, as nearly as
possible, the terms of 1/3 of all the planning commission members will expire each year. If a
vacancy occurs on a planning commission, the vacancy must be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as provided for an original appointment. A member shall hold office until
a successor is appointed.
(3) The membership of a planning commission must be representative of important
segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social
development of the local unit of government, in accordance with the major interests of the
local unit of government, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public
health, government, transportation, industry, housing, and commerce. The membership must
also be representative of the entire territory of the local unit of government to the extent
practicable. 
(4) Members of a planning commission must be qualified electors of the local unit of
government. However, the following number of planning commission members may be
individuals who are not qualified electors of the local unit of government but are qualified
electors of another local unit of government:
(a) 3, in a city that on September 1, 2008 had a population of more than 2,700 but less than
2,800.
(b) 2, in a city or village that has, or on September 1, 2008 had, a population of less than
5,000, except as provided in subdivision (a).
(c) 1, in a local unit of government not described in subdivision (a) or (b).
(5) In a township that on September 1, 2008 had a planning commission created under
former 1931 PA 285, 1 member of the legislative body or the chief elected official, or both,
may be appointed to the planning commission as ex officio members. In any other township, 1
member of the legislative body must be appointed to the planning commission as an ex officio
member. In a city, village, or county, the chief administrative official or an individual
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 5 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
designated by the chief administrative official, if any, the chief elected official, 1 or more
members of the legislative body, or any combination thereof, may be appointed to the planning
commission as ex officio members, unless prohibited by charter. However, in a city, village, or
county, not more than 1/3 of the members of the planning commission may be ex officio
members. Except as provided in this subsection, an elected officer or employee of the local
unit of government is not eligible to be a member of the planning commission. The term of an
ex officio member of a planning commission is as follows:
(a) The term of a chief elected official must correspond to the individual's term as chief
elected official.
(b) The term of a chief administrative official expires with the term of the chief elected
official that appointed the chief administrative official.
(c) The term of a member of the legislative body expires with the member's term on the
legislative body.
(6) For a county planning commission, the county shall make every reasonable effort to
ensure that the membership of the county planning commission includes a member of a public
school board or an administrative employee of a school district located, in whole or in part,
within the county's boundaries. This subsection applies each time an appointment is to be
made to the planning commission, unless an incumbent is being reappointed or an ex officio
member is being appointed under subsection (5).
(7) Subject to subsection (8), a city or village that has a population of less than 5,000, and
that has not created a planning commission by charter, may by an ordinance adopted under
section 11(1) provide that 1 of the following boards serve as its planning commission:
(a) The board of directors of the economic development corporation of the city or village
created under the economic development corporations act, 1974 PA 338, MCL 125.1601 to
125.1636.
(b) The board of a downtown development authority created under part 2 of the recodified
tax increment financing act, 2018 PA 57, MCL 125.4201 to 125.4230, if the boundaries of the
downtown district are the same as the boundaries of the city or village.
(c) The board of a tax increment finance authority under part 3 of the recodified tax
increment financing act, 2018 PA 57, MCL 125.4301 to 125.4329, if the boundaries of the
authority district are the same as the boundaries of the city or village.
(8) Subsections (1) to (5) do not apply to a planning commission established under
subsection (7). All other provisions of this act apply to a planning commission established
under subsection (7).
(9) The legislative body may remove a member of the planning commission for
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office on written charges and after a public
hearing. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered
to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the
planning commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by
the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning commission.
Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this subsection
constitutes malfeasance in office. Unless the legislative body, by ordinance, defines conflict of
interest for the purposes of this subsection, the planning commission shall do so in its bylaws.
(10) An ordinance creating a planning commission may impose additional requirements
relevant to the subject matter of, but not inconsistent with, this section.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 6 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 105, Imd. Eff. June 29, 2010 ;-- Am. 2024, Act
153, Eff. Apr. 2, 2025 
125.3817 Chairperson, secretary, and other offices; election; terms; appointment of
advisory committees.
Sec. 17.
(1) A planning commission shall elect a chairperson and secretary from its members and
create and fill other offices as it considers advisable. An ex officio member of the planning
commission is not eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of each officer shall be 1 year,
with opportunity for reelection as specified in bylaws adopted under section 19.
(2) A planning commission may appoint advisory committees whose members are not
members of the planning commission.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3819 Bylaws; adoption; public record requirements; annual report by planning
commission.
Sec. 19.
(1) A planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business, and shall
keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations.
(2) A planning commission shall make an annual written report to the legislative body
concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including recommendations
regarding actions by the legislative body related to planning and development.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3821 Meetings; frequency; time; place; special meeting; notice; compliance with
open meetings act; availability of writings to public.
Sec. 21.
(1) A planning commission shall hold not less than 4 regular meetings each year, and by
resolution shall determine the time and place of the meetings. Unless the bylaws provide
otherwise, a special meeting of the planning commission may be called by the chairperson or
by 2 other members, upon written request to the secretary. Unless the bylaws provide
otherwise, the secretary shall send written notice of a special meeting to planning commission
members not less than 48 hours before the meeting.
(2) The business that a planning commission may perform shall be conducted at a public
meeting of the planning commission held in compliance with the open meetings act, 1976 PA
267, MCL 15.261 to 15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place of a regular or special
meeting shall be given in the manner required by that act.
(3) A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a planning
commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in
compliance with the freedom of information act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 7 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
125.3823 Compensation; expenses; preparation of budget; acceptance of gifts.
Sec. 23.
(1) Members of a planning commission may be compensated for their services as provided
by the legislative body. A planning commission may adopt bylaws relative to compensation
and expenses of its members and employees for travel when engaged in the performance of
activities authorized by the legislative body, including, but not limited to, attendance at
conferences, workshops, educational and training programs, and meetings.
(2) After preparing the annual report required under section 19, a planning commission may
prepare a detailed budget and submit the budget to the legislative body for approval or
disapproval. The legislative body annually may appropriate funds for carrying out the
purposes and functions permitted under this act, and may match local government funds with
federal, state, county, or other local government or private grants, contributions, or
endowments.
(3) A planning commission may accept gifts for the exercise of its functions. However, in a
township, other than a township that on the effective date of this act had a planning
commission created under former 1931 PA 285, only the township board may accept such
gifts, on behalf of the planning commission. A gift of money so accepted in either case shall be
deposited with the treasurer of the local unit of government in a special nonreverting planning
commission fund for expenditure by the planning commission for the purpose designated by
the donor. The treasurer shall draw a warrant against the special nonreverting fund only upon
receipt of a voucher signed by the chairperson and secretary of the planning commission and
an order drawn by the clerk of the local unit of government. The expenditures of a planning
commission, exclusive of gifts and grants, shall be within the amounts appropriated by the
legislative body.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3825 Employment of planning director and other personnel; contract for services;
use of information and advice provided by public officials, departments, and agencies.
Sec. 25.
(1) A local unit of government may employ a planning director and other personnel as it
considers necessary, contract for the services of planning and other technicians, and incur
other expenses, within a budget authorized by the legislative body. This authority shall be
exercised by the legislative body, unless a charter provision or ordinance delegates this
authority to the planning commission or another body or official. The appointment of
employees is subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil
employees of the local unit of government.
(2) For the purposes of this act, a planning commission may make use of maps, data, and
other information and expert advice provided by appropriate federal, state, regional, county,
and municipal officials, departments, and agencies. All public officials, departments, and
agencies shall make available public information for the use of planning commissions and
furnish such other technical assistance and advice as they may have for planning purposes.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 8 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
ARTICLE III.
PREPARATION AND ADOPTION OF MASTER PLAN
125.3831 Master plan; preparation by planning commission; meetings with other
governmental planning commissions or agency staff; powers.
Sec. 31.
(1) A planning commission shall make and approve a master plan as a guide for
development within the planning jurisdiction subject to section 81 and the following:
(a) For a county, the master plan may include planning in cooperation with the constituted
authorities for incorporated areas in whole or to the extent to which, in the planning
commission's judgment, they are related to the planning of the unincorporated area or of the
county as a whole.
(b) For a township that on September 1, 2008 had a planning commission created under
former 1931 PA 285, or for a city or village, the planning jurisdiction may include any areas
outside of the municipal boundaries that, in the planning commission's judgment, are related to
the planning of the municipality.
(2) In the preparation of a master plan, a planning commission shall do all of the following,
as applicable:
(a) Make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future
growth within the planning jurisdiction with due regard to its relation to neighboring
jurisdictions.
(b) Consult with representatives of adjacent local units of government in respect to their
planning so that conflicts in master plans and zoning may be avoided.
(c) Cooperate with all departments of the state and federal governments, public
transportation agencies, and other public agencies concerned with programs for economic,
social, and physical development within the planning jurisdiction and seek the maximum
coordination of the local unit of government's programs with these agencies.
(3) In the preparation of the master plan, the planning commission may meet with other
governmental planning commissions or agency staff to deliberate.
(4) In general, a planning commission has such lawful powers as may be necessary to
enable it to promote local planning and otherwise carry out the purposes of this act.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 306, Imd. Eff. Dec. 17, 2010 
125.3833 Master plan; land use and infrastructure issues; inclusion of maps, plats,
charts, and other related matter; recommendations for physical development; additional
subjects; implementation of master street plan or certain elements; specifications; section
subject to MCL 125.3881(1); public transportation facilities.
Sec. 33.
(1) A master plan must address land use and infrastructure issues and may project 20 years
or more into the future. A master plan must include maps, plats, charts, and descriptive,
explanatory, and other related matter and must show the planning commission's
recommendations for the physical development of the planning jurisdiction.
(2) A master plan must also include those of the following subjects that reasonably can be
considered as pertinent to the future development of the planning jurisdiction:
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 9 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(a) A land use plan that consists in part of a classification and allocation of land for
agriculture, residences, commerce, industry, recreation, ways and grounds, subject to
subsection (5), public transportation facilities, public buildings, schools, soil conservation,
forests, woodlots, open space, wildlife refuges, and other uses and purposes. If a county has
not adopted a zoning ordinance under former 1943 PA 183 or the Michigan zoning enabling
act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3101 to 125.3702, a land use plan and program for the county
may be a general plan with a generalized future land use map.
(b) The general location, character, and extent of all of the following:
(i) All components of a transportation system and their interconnectivity, including streets
and bridges, public transit including public transportation facilities and routes, bicycle
facilities, pedestrian ways, freight facilities and routes, port facilities, railroad facilities, and
airports, to provide for the safe and efficient movement of people and goods in a manner that
is appropriate to the context of the community and, as applicable, considers all legal users of
the public right-of-way.
(ii) Waterways and waterfront developments. 
(iii) Sanitary sewers and water supply systems. 
(iv) Facilities for flood prevention, drainage, pollution prevention, and maintenance of
water levels. 
(v) Public utilities and structures.
(c) Recommendations as to the general character, extent, and layout of redevelopment or
rehabilitation of blighted areas, and the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating,
abandonment, change of use, or extension of streets, grounds, open spaces, buildings, utilities,
or other facilities.
(d) For a local unit of government that has adopted a zoning ordinance, a zoning plan for
various zoning districts controlling the height, area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and
premises. The zoning plan must include an explanation of how the land use categories on the
future land use map relate to the districts on the zoning map.
(e) An assessment of the community's existing and forecasted housing demands, with
strategies and policies for addressing those demands.
(f) Recommendations for implementing any of the master plan's proposals.
(3) If a master plan is or includes a master street plan or 1 or more elements described in
subsection (2)(b)(i), the means for implementing the master street plan or elements in
cooperation with the county road commission and the state transportation department must be
specified in the master street plan in a manner consistent with the respective powers and duties
of and any written agreements between these entities and the municipality.
(4) This section is subject to section 81(1).
(5) The reference to public transportation facilities in subsection (2)(a) only applies to a
master plan that is adopted or substantively amended after March 17, 2011.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 134, Imd. Eff. Aug. 2, 2010 ;-- Am. 2010, Act
306, Imd. Eff. Dec. 17, 2010 ;-- Am. 2024, Act 153, Eff. Apr. 2, 2025 
125.3835 Subplan; adoption.
Sec. 35.
A planning commission may, by a majority vote of the members, adopt a subplan for a
geographic area less than the entire planning jurisdiction, if, because of the unique physical
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 10 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
characteristics of that area, more intensive planning is necessary for the purposes set forth in
section 7.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3837 Metropolitan county planning commission; designation; powers.
Sec. 37.
(1) A county board of commissioners may designate the county planning commission as the
metropolitan county planning commission. A county planning commission so designated shall
perform metropolitan and regional planning whenever necessary or desirable. The
metropolitan county planning commission may engage in comprehensive planning, including,
but not limited to, the following:
(a) Preparation, as a guide for long-range development, of general physical plans with
respect to the pattern and intensity of land use and the provision of public facilities, together
with long-range fiscal plans for such development.
(b) Programming of capital improvements based on relative urgency, together with
definitive financing plans for the improvements to be constructed in the earlier years of the
program.
(c) Coordination of all related plans of local governmental agencies within the metropolitan
area or region.
(d) Intergovernmental coordination of all related planning activities among the state and
local governmental agencies within the metropolitan area or region.
(2) In addition to the powers conferred by other provisions of this act, a metropolitan county
planning commission may apply for, receive, and accept grants from any local, regional, state,
or federal governmental agency and agree to and comply with the terms and conditions of
such grants. A metropolitan county planning commission may do any and all things necessary
or desirable to secure the financial aid or cooperation of a regional, state, or federal
governmental agency in carrying out its functions, when approved by a 2/3 vote of the county
board of commissioners.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3839 Master plan; adoption; procedures; notice; submittals; use of electronic mail.
Sec. 39.
(1) A master plan shall be adopted under the procedures set forth in this section and sections
41 and 43. A master plan may be adopted as a whole or by successive parts corresponding with
major geographical areas of the planning jurisdiction or with functional subject matter areas of
the master plan.
(2) Before preparing a master plan, a planning commission shall send to all of the
following, by first-class mail or personal delivery, a notice explaining that the planning
commission intends to prepare a master plan and requesting the recipient's cooperation and
comment:
(a) For any local unit of government undertaking a master plan, the planning commission,
or if there is no planning commission, the legislative body, of each municipality located within
or contiguous to the local unit of government.
(b) For a county undertaking a master plan, the regional planning commission for the region
in which the county is located, if any.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 11 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(c) For a county undertaking a master plan, the county planning commission, or if there is
no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, for each county located
contiguous to the county.
(d) For a municipality undertaking a master plan, the regional planning commission for the
region in which the municipality is located, if there is no county planning commission for the
county in which that municipality is located. If there is a county planning commission, the
municipal planning commission may consult with the regional planning commission but is not
required to do so.
(e) For a municipality undertaking a master plan, the county planning commission, or if
there is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, for the county in
which that municipality is located.
(f) For any local unit of government undertaking a master plan, each public utility company,
railroad company, and public transportation agency owning or operating a public utility,
railroad, or public transportation system within the local unit of government, and any
government entity that registers its name and mailing address for this purpose with the
planning commission.
(g) If the master plan will include a master street plan, the county road commission and the
state transportation department.
(3) A submittal under section 41 or 43 by or to an entity described in subsection (2) may be
made by personal or first-class mail delivery of a hard copy or by electronic mail. However,
the planning commission preparing the plan shall not make such submittals by electronic mail
unless, in the notice described in subsection (2), the planning commission states that it intends
to make such submittals by electronic mail and the entity receiving that notice does not
respond by objecting to the use of electronic mail. Electronic mail may contain a link to a
website on which the submittal is posted if the website is accessible to the public free of
charge.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 306, Imd. Eff. Dec. 17, 2010 
125.3841 Preparation of proposed master plan; submission to legislative body for review
and comment; approval required; notice; submission of comments; statements as
advisory.
Sec. 41.
(1) After preparing a proposed master plan, a planning commission shall submit the
proposed master plan to the legislative body for review and comment. The process of adopting
a master plan shall not proceed further unless the legislative body approves the distribution of
the proposed master plan.
(2) If the legislative body approves the distribution of the proposed master plan, it shall
notify the secretary of the planning commission, and the secretary of the planning commission
shall submit, in the manner provided in section 39(3), a copy of the proposed master plan, for
review and comment, to all of the following:
(a) For any local unit of government proposing a master plan, the planning commission, or
if there is no planning commission, the legislative body, of each municipality located within or
contiguous to the local unit of government.
(b) For a county proposing a master plan, the regional planning commission for the region
in which the county is located, if any.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 12 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(c) For a county proposing a master plan, the county planning commission, or if there is no
county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, for each county located
contiguous to the county.
(d) For a municipality proposing a master plan, the regional planning commission for the
region in which the municipality is located, if there is no county planning commission for the
county in which that local unit of government is located. If there is a county planning
commission, the secretary of the municipal planning commission may submit a copy of the
proposed master plan to the regional planning commission but is not required to do so.
(e) For a municipality proposing a master plan, the county planning commission, or if there
is no county planning commission, the county board of commissioners, for the county in
which that municipality is located. The secretary of the municipal planning commission shall
concurrently submit to the county planning commission, in the manner provided in section
39(3), a statement that the requirements of subdivision (a) have been met or, if there is no
county planning commission, shall submit to the county board of commissioners, in the
manner provided in section 39(3), a statement that the requirements of subdivisions (a) and (d)
have been met. The statement shall be signed by the secretary and shall include the name and
address of each planning commission or legislative body to which a copy of the proposed
master plan was submitted under subdivision (a) or (d), as applicable, and the date of
submittal.
(f) For any local unit of government proposing a master plan, each public utility company,
railroad company, and public transportation agency owning or operating a public utility,
railroad, or public transportation system within the local unit of government, and any
government entity that registers its name and address for this purpose with the secretary of the
planning commission. An entity described in this subdivision that receives a copy of a
proposed master plan, or of a final master plan as provided in section 43(5), shall reimburse
the local unit of government for any copying and postage costs thereby incurred.
(g) If the proposed master plan is or includes a proposed master street plan, the county road
commission and the state transportation department.
(3) An entity described in subsection (2) may submit comments on the proposed master plan
to the planning commission in the manner provided in section 39(3) within 63 days after the
proposed master plan was submitted to that entity under subsection (2). If the county planning
commission or the county board of commissioners that receives a copy of a proposed master
plan under subsection (2)(e) submits comments, the comments shall include, but need not be
limited to, both of the following, as applicable:
(a) A statement whether the county planning commission or county board of commissioners
considers the proposed master plan to be inconsistent with the master plan of any municipality
or region described in subsection (2)(a) or (d).
(b) If the county has a county master plan, a statement whether the county planning
commission considers the proposed master plan to be inconsistent with the county master plan.
(4) The statements provided for in subsection (3)(a) and (b) are advisory only.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 ;-- Am. 2010, Act 306, Imd. Eff. Dec. 17, 2010 
125.3843 Proposed master plan; public hearing; notice; approval by resolution of
planning commission; statement; submission of copy of master plan to legislative body;
approval or rejection by legislative body; procedures; submission of adopted master plan
to certain entities.
Sec. 43.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 13 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(1) Before approving a proposed master plan, a planning commission shall hold not less
than 1 public hearing on the proposed master plan. The hearing shall be held after the
expiration of the deadline for comment under section 41(3). The planning commission shall
give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the local unit of government. The
planning commission shall also submit notice of the public hearing in the manner provided in
section 39(3) to each entity described in section 39(2). This notice may accompany the
proposed master plan submitted under section 41.
(2) The approval of the proposed master plan shall be by resolution of the planning
commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than 2/3 of the members of a city or
village planning commission or not less than a majority of the members of a township or
county planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive
and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the master plan. A statement
recording the planning commission's approval of the master plan, signed by the chairperson or
secretary of the planning commission, shall be included on the inside of the front or back
cover of the master plan and, if the future land use map is a separate document from the text of
the master plan, on the future land use map. Following approval of the proposed master plan
by the planning commission, the secretary of the planning commission shall submit a copy of
the master plan to the legislative body.
(3) Approval of the proposed master plan by the planning commission under subsection (2)
is the final step for adoption of the master plan, unless the legislative body by resolution has
asserted the right to approve or reject the master plan. In that case, after approval of the
proposed master plan by the planning commission, the legislative body shall approve or reject
the proposed master plan. A statement recording the legislative body's approval of the master
plan, signed by the clerk of the legislative body, shall be included on the inside of the front or
back cover of the master plan and, if the future land use map is a separate document from the
text of the master plan, on the future land use map.
(4) If the legislative body rejects the proposed master plan, the legislative body shall submit
to the planning commission a statement of its objections to the proposed master plan. The
planning commission shall consider the legislative body's objections and revise the proposed
master plan so as to address those objections. The procedures provided in subsections (1) to
(3) and this subsection shall be repeated until the legislative body approves the proposed
master plan.
(5) Upon final adoption of the master plan, the secretary of the planning commission shall
submit, in the manner provided in section 39(3), copies of the adopted master plan to the same
entities to which copies of the proposed master plan were required to be submitted under
section 41(2).
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3845 Extension, addition, revision, or other amendment to master plan; adoption;
procedures; review and findings.
Sec. 45.
(1) An extension, addition, revision, or other amendment to a master plan shall be adopted
by following the procedure under sections 39, 41, and 43, subject to all of the following:
(a) Any of the following amendments to a master plan may be made without following the
procedure under sections 39, 41, and 43:
(i) A grammatical, typographical, or similar editorial change.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 14 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(ii) A title change.
(iii) A change to conform to an adopted plat.
(b) Subject to subdivision (a), the review period provided for in section 41(3) shall be 42
days instead of 63 days.
(c) When a planning commission sends notice to an entity under section 39(2) that it intends
to prepare a subplan, the notice may indicate that the local unit of government intends not to
provide that entity with further notices of or copies of proposed or final subplans otherwise
required to be submitted to that entity under section 39, 41, or 43. Unless the entity responds
that it chooses to receive notice of subplans, the local unit of government is not required to
provide further notice of subplans to that entity.
(2) At least every 5 years after adoption of a master plan, a planning commission shall
review the master plan and determine whether to commence the procedure to amend the
master plan or adopt a new master plan. The review and its findings shall be recorded in the
minutes of the relevant meeting or meetings of the planning commission.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3847 Part of county master plan covering incorporated area; adoption by
appropriate city or village required; exception.
Sec. 47.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a part of a county master plan covering an incorporated area
within the county shall not be recognized as the official master plan or part of the official
master plan for that area unless adopted by the appropriate city or village in the manner
prescribed by this act.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the incorporated area is subject to county zoning
pursuant to the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3101 to 125.3702, and a
contract under the urban cooperation act, 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to 124.512, or
1967 (Ex Sess) PA 8, MCL 124.531 to 124.536.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3849 City or village planning department; authority to submit proposed master plan,
or proposed extension, addition, revision, or other amendment.
Sec. 49.
(1) This act does not alter the authority of a planning department of a city or village created
by charter to submit a proposed master plan, or a proposed extension, addition, revision, or
other amendment to a master plan, to the planning commission, whether directly or indirectly
as provided by charter.
(2) Subsection (1) notwithstanding, a planning commission described in subsection (1) shall
comply with the requirements of this act.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3851 Public interest and understanding; promotion.
Sec. 51.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 15 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(1) To promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan, a planning
commission may publish and distribute copies of the master plan or of any report, and employ
other means of publicity and education.
(2) A planning commission shall consult with and advise public officials and agencies,
public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and citizens
concerning the promotion or implementation of the master plan.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
ARTICLE IV .
SPECIAL PROVISIONS, INCLUDING CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW
125.3861 Construction of certain projects in area covered by municipal master plan;
approval; initiation of work on project; requirements; report and advice.
Sec. 61.
(1) A street; square, park, playground, public way, ground, or other open space; or public
building or other structure shall not be constructed or authorized for construction in an area
covered by a municipal master plan unless the location, character, and extent of the street,
public way, open space, structure, or utility have been submitted to the planning commission
by the legislative body or other body having jurisdiction over the authorization or financing of
the project and has been approved by the planning commission. The planning commission
shall submit its reasons for approval or disapproval to the body having jurisdiction. If the
planning commission disapproves, the body having jurisdiction may overrule the planning
commission by a vote of not less than 2/3 of its entire membership for a township that on the
enactment date of this act had a planning commission created under former 1931 PA 285, or
for a city or village, or by a vote of not less than a majority of its membership for any other
township. If the planning commission fails to act within 35 days after submission of the
proposal to the planning commission, the project shall be considered to be approved by the
planning commission.
(2) Following adoption of the county plan or any part of a county plan and the certification
by the county planning commission to the county board of commissioners of a copy of the
plan, work shall not be initiated on any project involving the expenditure of money by a
county board, department, or agency for the acquisition of land, the erection of structures, or
the extension, construction, or improvement of any physical facility by any county board,
department, or agency unless a full description of the project, including, but not limited to, its
proposed location and extent, has been submitted to the county planning commission and the
report and advice of the planning commission on the proposal have been received by the
county board of commissioners and by the county board, department, or agency submitting the
proposal. However, work on the project may proceed if the planning commission fails to
provide in writing its report and advice upon the proposal within 35 days after the proposal is
filed with the planning commission. The planning commission shall provide copies of the
report and advice to the county board, department, or agency sponsoring the proposal.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 16 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
125.3863 Approval of construction project before effective date of act; rescission of
authorization; failure of planning commission to act within certain period of time.
Sec. 63.
If the opening, widening, or extension of a street, or the acquisition or enlargement of any
square, park, playground, or other open space has been approved by a township planning
commission that was created before the effective date of this act under former 1931 PA 285 or
by a city or village planning commission and authorized by the legislative body as provided
under section 61, the legislative body shall not rescind its authorization unless the matter has
been resubmitted to the planning commission and the rescission has been approved by the
planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter. The
planning commission shall submit its reasons for approval or disapproval of the rescission to
the legislative body. If the planning commission disapproves the rescission, the legislative
body may overrule the planning commission by a vote of not less than 2/3 of its entire
membership. If the planning commission fails to act within 63 days after submission of the
proposed rescission to the planning commission, the proposed rescission shall be considered to
be approved by the planning commission.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3865 Capital improvements program of public structures and improvements;
preparation; basis.
Sec. 65.
(1) To further the desirable future development of the local unit of government under the
master plan, a planning commission, after adoption of a master plan, shall annually prepare a
capital improvements program of public structures and improvements, unless the planning
commission is exempted from this requirement by charter or otherwise. If the planning
commission is exempted, the legislative body either shall prepare and adopt a capital
improvements program, separate from or as a part of the annual budget, or shall delegate the
preparation of the capital improvements program to the chief elected official or a nonelected
administrative official, subject to final approval by the legislative body. The capital
improvements program shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general
order of their priority, that in the commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can
be undertaken within the ensuing 6-year period. The capital improvements program shall be
based upon the requirements of the local unit of government for all types of public structures
and improvements. Consequently, each agency or department of the local unit of government
with authority for public structures or improvements shall upon request furnish the planning
commission with lists, plans, and estimates of time and cost of those public structures and
improvements.
(2) Any township may prepare and adopt a capital improvement program. However,
subsection (1) is only mandatory for a township if the township, alone or jointly with 1 or
more other local units of government, owns or operates a water supply or sewage disposal
system.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 17 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
125.3867 Programs for public structures and improvements; recommendations.
Sec. 67.
A planning commission may recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for
public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof, regardless of whether the
planning commission is exempted from the requirement to prepare a capital improvements
program under section 65.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3869 Copy of zoning ordinance and amendments; request by county planning
commission for submission by municipal planning commission.
Sec. 69.
If a municipal planning commission has zoning duties pursuant to section 83 and the
municipality has adopted a zoning ordinance, the county planning commission, if any, may, by
first-class mail or personal delivery, request the municipal planning commission to submit to
the county planning commission a copy of the zoning ordinance and any amendments. The
municipal planning commission shall submit the requested documents to the county planning
commission within 63 days after the request is received and shall submit any future
amendments to the zoning ordinance within 63 days after the amendments are adopted. The
municipal planning commission may submit a zoning ordinance or amendment under this
subsection electronically.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3871 Recommendations for ordinances or rules governing subdivision of land; public
hearing; notice; action on proposed plat; approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval by planning commission; approval of plat as amendment to master plan.
Sec. 71.
(1) A planning commission may recommend to the legislative body provisions of an
ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land authorized under section 105 of the land
division act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.105. If a township is subject to county zoning consistent
with section 209 of the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3209, or a city
or village is subject to county zoning pursuant to the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA
110, MCL 125.3101 to 125.3702, and a contract under the urban cooperation act of 1967, 1967
(Ex Sess) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to 124.512, or 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 8, MCL 124.531 to 124.536,
the county planning commission may recommend to the legislative body of the municipality
provisions of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land authorized under section
105 of the land division act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.105. A planning commission may
proceed under this subsection on its own initiative or upon request of the appropriate
legislative body.
(2) Recommendations for a subdivision ordinance or rule may address plat design,
including the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets and
to the master plan; adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of
firefighting apparatus, recreation, light, and air; and the avoidance of congestion of population,
including minimum width and area of lots. The recommendations may also address the extent
to which streets shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 18 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
mains, piping, or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of a
plat. 
(3) Before recommending an ordinance or rule described in subsection (1), the planning
commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or rule. The planning
commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days
before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the local unit of
government. 
(4) If a municipality has adopted a master plan or master street plan, the planning
commission of that municipality shall review and make recommendations on plats before
action thereon by the legislative body under section 112 of the land division act, 1967 PA 288,
MCL 560.112. If a township is subject to county zoning consistent with section 209 of the
Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3209, or a city or village is subject to
county zoning pursuant to the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3101 to
125.3702, and a contract under the urban cooperation act of 1967, 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 7, MCL
124.501 to 124.512, or 1967 (Ex Sess) PA 8, MCL 124.531 to 124.536, and the municipality
has adopted a master plan or master street plan, the county planning commission shall also
review and make recommendations on plats before action thereon by the legislative body of
the municipality under section 112 of the land division act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.112.
(5) A planning commission shall not take action on a proposed plat without affording an
opportunity for a public hearing thereon. A plat submitted to the planning commission shall
contain the name and address of the proprietor or other person to whom notice of a hearing
shall be sent. Not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time, and
place of the hearing shall be sent to that person at that address by mail and shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Similar notice shall be mailed to the
owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land.
(6) A planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of a plat within 63 days after the plat is submitted to the planning commission. If
applicable standards under the land division act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.101 to 560.293, and
an ordinance or published rules governing the subdivision of land authorized under section
105 of that act, MCL 560.105, are met, the planning commission shall recommend approval of
the plat. If the planning commission fails to act within the required period, the plat shall be
considered to have been recommended for approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be
issued by the planning commission upon request of the proprietor. However, the proprietor
may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of the 63-day period. The grounds for
any recommendation of disapproval of a plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning
commission.
(7) A plat approved by a municipality and recorded under section 172 of the land division
act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.172, shall be considered to be an amendment to the master plan
and a part thereof. Approval of a plat by a municipality does not constitute or effect an
acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. 
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
ARTICLE V .
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND REPEALER
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 19 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
125.3881 Plan adopted or amended under planning act repealed under MCL 125.3885;
effect; city or home rule village charter provision creating planning commission or
ordinance implementing provision before effective date of act; ordinance creating
planning commission under former law; ordinance or rules governing subdivision of
land.
Sec. 81.
(1) Unless rescinded by the local unit of government, any plan adopted or amended under a
planning act repealed under section 85 need not be readopted under this act but continues in
effect as a master plan under this act, regardless of whether it is entitled a master plan, basic
plan, county plan, development plan, guide plan, land use plan, municipal plan, township plan,
plan, or any other term. This includes, but is not limited to, a plan prepared by a planning
commission and adopted before the effective date of this act to satisfy the requirements of
section 1 of the former city and village zoning act, 1921 PA 207, section 3 of the former
township zoning act, 1943 PA 184, section 3 of the former county zoning act, 1943 PA 183, or
section 203(1) of the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3203. The master
plan is subject to the requirements of this act, including, but not limited to, the requirement for
periodic review under section 45(2) and the amendment procedures set forth in this act.
However, the master plan is not subject to the requirements of section 33 until it is first
amended under this act. 
(2) Unless repealed, a city or home rule village charter provision creating a planning
commission before the effective date of this act and any ordinance adopted before the effective
date of this act implementing that charter provision continues in effect under this act, and the
planning commission need not be newly created by an ordinance adopted under this act.
However, both of the following apply:
(a) The legislative body may by ordinance increase the powers and duties of the planning
commission to correspond with the powers and duties of a planning commission created under
this act. Provisions of this act regarding planning commission powers and duties do not
otherwise apply to a planning commission created by charter before the effective date of this
act and provisions of this act regarding planning commission membership, appointment, and
organization do not apply to such a planning commission. All other provisions of this act,
including, but not limited to, provisions regarding planning commission selection of officers,
meetings, rules, records, appointment of employees, contracts for services, and expenditures,
do apply to such a planning commission.
(b) The legislative body shall amend any ordinance adopted before the effective date of this
act to implement the charter provision, or repeal the ordinance and adopt a new ordinance, to
fully conform to the requirements of this act made applicable by subdivision (a), by the earlier
of the following dates:
(i) The date when an amendatory or new ordinance is first adopted under this act for any
purpose.
(ii) July 1, 2011.
(3) Unless repealed, an ordinance creating a planning commission under former 1931 PA
285 or former 1945 PA 282 or a resolution creating a planning commission under former 1959
PA 168 continues in effect under this act, and the planning commission need not be newly
created by an ordinance adopted under this act. However, all of the following apply:
(a) Beginning on the effective date of this act, the duties of the planning commission are
subject to the requirements of this act.
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 20 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
(b) The legislative body shall amend the ordinance, or repeal the ordinance or resolution and
adopt a new ordinance, to fully conform to the requirements of this act by the earlier of the
following dates:
(i) The date when an amendatory or new ordinance is first adopted under this act for any
purpose. 
(ii) July 1, 2011.
(c) An ordinance adopted under subdivision (b) is not subject to referendum.
(4) Unless repealed or rescinded by the legislative body, an ordinance or published rules
governing the subdivision of land authorized under section 105 of the land division act, 1967
PA 288, MCL 560.105, need not be readopted under this act or amended to comply with this
act but continue in effect under this act. However, if amended, the ordinance or published rules
shall be amended under the procedures of this act.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
125.3883 Transfer of powers, duties, and records.
Sec. 83.
(1) If, on the effective date of this act, a planning commission had the powers and duties of
a zoning board or zoning commission under the former city and village zoning act, 1921 PA
207, the former county zoning act, 1943 PA 183, or the former township zoning act, 1943 PA
184, and under the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3101 to 125.3702,
the planning commission may continue to exercise those powers and duties without
amendment of the ordinance, resolution, or charter provision that created the planning
commission. 
(2) If, on the effective date of this act, a local unit of government had a planning
commission without zoning authority created under former 1931 PA 285, former 1945 PA 282,
or former 1959 PA 168, the legislative body may by amendment to the ordinance creating the
planning commission, or, if the planning commission was created by resolution, may by
resolution, transfer to the planning commission all the powers and duties provided to a zoning
board or zoning commission created under the Michigan zoning enabling act, 2006 PA 110,
MCL 125.3101 to 125.3702. If an existing zoning board or zoning commission in the local
unit of government is nearing the completion of its draft zoning ordinance, the legislative body
shall postpone the transfer of the zoning board's or zoning commission's powers, duties, and
records until the completion of the draft zoning ordinance, but is not required to postpone the
transfer more than 1 year.
(3) If, on or after the effective date of this act, a planning commission is created in a local
unit of government that has had a zoning board or zoning commission since before the
effective date of this act, the legislative body shall transfer all the powers, duties, and records
of the zoning board or zoning commission to the planning commission before July 1, 2011. If
the existing zoning board or zoning commission is nearing the completion of its draft zoning
ordinance, the legislative body may, by resolution, postpone the transfer of the zoning board's
or zoning commission's powers, duties, and records until the completion of the draft zoning
ordinance, but not later than until 1 year after creation of the planning commission or July 1,
2011, whichever comes first.
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 21 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov
125.3885 Repeal of certain acts.
Sec. 85.
(1) The following acts are repealed:
(a) 1931 PA 285, MCL 125.31 to 125.45.
(b) 1945 PA 282, MCL 125.101 to 125.115.
(c) 1959 PA 168, MCL 125.321 to 125.333.
(2) Any plan adopted or amended under an act repealed under subsection (1) is subject to
section 81(1).
History: 2008, Act 33, Eff. Sept. 1, 2008 
Rendered Saturday, September 5, 2026 Page 22 of 22 Michigan Compiled Laws Complete Through PA 91 of 2026
Courtesy of legislature.mi.gov