Act of Jul. 31, 1968,P.L. 805, No. 247 Cl. 53 - PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING
 CODE 
 PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE
 Act of Jul. 31, 1968,
 P.L. 805,
 No. 247
 Cl. 53
 19680247ua
 (Reenacted and amended Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 AN ACT
 To empower cities of the second class A, and third class, boroughs, incorporated towns,
 townships of the first and second classes including those within a county of the second
 class and counties of the second through eighth classes, individually or jointly,
 to plan their development and to govern the same by zoning, subdivision and land development
 ordinances, planned residential development and other ordinances, by official maps,
 by the reservation of certain land for future public purpose and by the acquisition
 of such land; to promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning practices
 and to promote the effective utilization of renewable energy sources; providing for
 the establishment of planning commissions, planning departments, planning committees
 and zoning hearing boards, authorizing them to charge fees, make inspections and hold
 public hearings; providing for mediation; providing for transferable development rights;
 providing for appropriations, appeals to courts and penalties for violations; and
 repealing acts and parts of acts. (Title amended Dec. 14, 1992, P.L.815, No.131)
 Compiler's Note: Section 301(a)(1) of Act 58 of 1996, which created the Department of Community and
 Economic Development and abolished the Department of Community Affairs, provided that
 the provision of technical assistance to political subdivisions with regard to land
 use and zoning matters conducted pursuant to Act 247 are transferred from the Department
 of Community Affairs to the Department of Community and Economic Development.
 19680247uc
 TABLE OF CONTENTS
 Article I General Provisions
 Article II Planning Agencies
 Article III Comprehensive Plan
 Article IV Official Map
 Article V Subdivision and Land Development
 Article V-A Municipal Capital Improvement
 Article VI Zoning
 Article VII Planned Residential Development
 Article VII-A Traditional Neighborhood Development
 Article VIII Zoning Challenges; General Provisions (Repealed)
 Article VIII-A Joint Municipal Zoning
 Article IX Zoning Hearing Board and other Administrative Proceedings
 Article X Appeals (Repealed)
 Article X-A Appeals to Court
 Article XI Joint Municipal Planning Commissions
 Article XI-A Wastewater Processing Cooperative Planning
 Article XII Repeals
 19680247uh
 The General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania hereby enacts as follows:
 19680247u101h
 ARTICLE I
 General Provisions
 19680247u101s
 Section 101. Short Title.--This act shall be known and may be cited as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities
 Planning Code."
 19680247u102s
 Section 102. Effective Date.--This act shall take effect January 1, 1969.
 19680247u103s
 Section 103. Construction of Act.--The provisions of this act shall not affect any act done, contract
 executed or liability incurred prior to its effective date, or affect any suit or
 prosecution pending or to be instituted, to enforce any right, rule, regulation, or
 ordinance or to punish any offense against any such repealed laws or against any ordinance
 enacted under them. All ordinances, resolutions, regulations and rules made pursuant
 to any act of Assembly repealed by this act shall continue in effect as if such act
 had not been repealed, except as the provisions are inconsistent herewith. The provisions
 of other acts relating to municipalities other than cities of the first and second
 class and counties of the second class are made a part of this act and this code shall
 be construed to give effect to all provisions of other acts not specifically repealed.
 19680247u104s
 Section 104. Constitutional Construction.--The provisions of this act shall be severable, and if
 any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, the validity of any of
 the remaining provisions of this act shall not be affected. It is hereby declared
 as the legislative intention that this act would have been adopted had such unconstitutional
 provision not been included therein.
 19680247u105s
 Section 105. Purpose of Act.--It is the intent, purpose and scope of this act to protect and promote
 safety, health and morals; to accomplish coordinated development; to provide for the
 general welfare by guiding and protecting amenity, convenience, future governmental,
 economic, practical, and social and cultural facilities, development and growth, as
 well as the improvement of governmental processes and functions; to guide uses of
 land and structures, type and location of streets, public grounds and other facilities;
 to promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning practices and to
 promote the effective utilization of renewable energy sources; to promote the preservation
 of this Commonwealth's natural and historic resources and prime agricultural land;
 to encourage municipalities to adopt municipal or joint municipal comprehensive plans
 generally consistent with the county comprehensive plan; to promote small business
 development and foster a business-friendly environment in this Commonwealth; to ensure
 that municipalities adopt zoning ordinances which are generally consistent with the
 municipality's comprehensive plan; to encourage the preservation of prime agricultural
 land and natural and historic resources through easements, transfer of development
 rights and rezoning; to ensure that municipalities enact zoning ordinances that facilitate
 the present and future economic viability of existing agricultural operations in this
 Commonwealth and do not prevent or impede the owner or operator's need to change or
 expand their operations in the future in order to remain viable; to encourage the
 revitalization of established urban centers; and to permit municipalities to minimize
 such problems as may presently exist or which may be foreseen and wherever the provisions
 of this act promote, encourage, require or authorize governing bodies to protect,
 preserve or conserve open land, consisting of natural resources, forests and woodlands,
 any actions taken to protect, preserve or conserve such land shall not be for the
 purposes of precluding access for forestry.
 (105 amended May 9, 2002, P.L.305, No.43)
 19680247u106s
 Section 106. Appropriations, Grants and Gifts.--The governing body of every municipality is hereby
 authorized and empowered to make such appropriations as it may see fit, to accept
 gifts, grants or bequests from public and private sources for the purpose of carrying
 out the powers and duties conferred by this act, and to enter into agreements regarding
 the acceptance or utilization of such grants, gifts or bequests.
 19680247u107s
 Section 107. Definitions.--(a) The following words and phrases when used in this act shall have the meanings given
 to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
 "Agricultural operation," an enterprise that is actively engaged in the commercial
 production and preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock products and
 in the production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic,
 horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes
 an enterprise that implements changes in production practices and procedures or types
 of crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent with practices
 and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
 development within the agricultural industry. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.495,
 No.68)
 "Applicant," a landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application
 for development including his heirs, successors and assigns.
 "Application for development," every application, whether preliminary, tentative or
 final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development
 including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval
 of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
 "Appointing authority," the mayor in cities; the board of commissioners in counties;
 the council in incorporated towns and boroughs; the board of commissioners in townships
 of the first class; and the board of supervisors in townships of the second class;
 or as may be designated in the law providing for the form of government.
 "Authority," a body politic and corporate created pursuant to the act of May 2, 1945
 (P.L.382, No.164), known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
 "Center for Local Government Services." The Governor's Center for Local Government Services located within the Department
 of Community and Economic Development. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "City" or "cities," cities of the second class A and third class.
 "Common open space," a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination
 of land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use
 or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking
 areas, and areas set aside for public facilities.
 "Conditional use," a use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the
 provisions in Article VI.
 "Consistency," an agreement or correspondence between matters being compared which
 denotes a reasonable, rational, similar connection or relationship. (Def. added June
 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "County," any county of the second class through eighth class. (Def. amended Dec.
 14, 1992, P.L.815, No.131)
 "County comprehensive plan," a land use and growth management plan prepared by the
 county planning commission and adopted by the county commissioners which establishes
 broad goals and criteria for municipalities to use in preparation of their comprehensive
 plans and land use regulation. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Designated growth area," a region within a county or counties described in a municipal
 or multimunicipal plan that preferably includes and surrounds a city, borough or village
 and within which residential and mixed use development is permitted or planned for
 at densities of one unit to the acre or more, commercial, industrial and institutional
 uses are permitted or planned for and public infrastructure services are provided
 or planned. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "Developer," any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission
 of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land
 development.
 "Development of regional significance and impact," any land development that, because
 of its character, magnitude or location, will have substantial effect upon the health,
 safety or welfare of citizens in more than one municipality. (Def. added June 22,
 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "Development plan," the provisions for development, including a planned residential
 development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk
 of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets,
 ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions
 of the development plan" when used in this act shall mean the written and graphic
 materials referred to in this definition.
 "Electronic notice," notice given by a municipality through the Internet of the time
 and place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered
 at the hearing. (Def. added July 2, 2013, P.L.201, No.36)
 "Forestry," the management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance
 with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting,
 transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any
 land development. (Def. added May 27, 1994, P.L.251, No.38)
 "Future growth area," an area of a municipal or multimunicipal plan outside of and
 adjacent to a designated growth area where residential, commercial, industrial and
 institutional uses and development are permitted or planned at varying densities and
 public infrastructure services may or may not be provided, but future development
 at greater densities is planned to accompany the orderly extension and provision of
 public infrastructure services. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "General consistency, generally consistent," that which exhibits consistency. (Def.
 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Governing body," the council in cities, boroughs and incorporated towns; the board
 of commissioners in townships of the first class; the board of supervisors in townships
 of the second class; the board of commissioners in counties of the second class through
 eighth class or as may be designated in the law providing for the form of government.
 (Def. amended Dec. 14, 1992, P.L.815, No.131)
 "Land development," any of the following activities:
 (1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land
 for any purpose involving:
 (i) a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
 or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of
 the number of occupants or tenure; or
 (ii) the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
 or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
 of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
 (2) A subdivision of land.
 (3) Development in accordance with section 503(1.1).
 "Landowner," the legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder
 of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject
 to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights
 of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
 "Lot," a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
 as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
 "Mailed notice," notice given by a municipality by first class mail of the time and
 place of a public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered
 at the hearing. (Def. added July 2, 2013, P.L.201, No.36)
 "Mediation," a voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually
 select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences,
 culminating in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider
 acceptable.
 "Minerals," any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not coherent. The
 term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock
 and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite
 and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and crude oil and natural gas. (Def. added
 June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Mobilehome," a transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy,
 contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral
 unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
 complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
 operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.
 "Mobilehome lot," a parcel of land in a mobilehome park, improved with the necessary
 utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of
 a single mobilehome.
 "Mobilehome park," a parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated
 and improved that it contains two or more mobilehome lots for the placement thereon
 of mobilehomes.
 "Multimunicipal plan," a plan developed and adopted by any number of contiguous municipalities,
 including a joint municipal plan as authorized by this act, except that all of the
 municipalities participating in the plan need not be contiguous if all of them are
 within the same school district. (Def. amended Nov. 19, 2004, P.L.831, No.99)
 "Multimunicipal planning agency," a planning agency comprised of representatives of
 more than one municipality and constituted as a joint municipal planning commission
 in accordance with Article XI, or otherwise by resolution of the participating municipalities,
 to address on behalf of the participating municipalities multimunicipal issues, including,
 but not limited to, agricultural and open space preservation, natural and historic
 resources, transportation, housing and economic development. (Def. added June 22,
 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Municipal authority," a body politic and corporate created pursuant to the act of
 May 2, 1945 (P.L.382, No.164), known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
 "Municipal engineer," a professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth
 of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a municipality, planning agency
 or joint planning commission.
 "Municipality," any city of the second class A or third class, borough, incorporated
 town, township of the first or second class, county of the second class through eighth
 class, home rule municipality, or any similar general purpose unit of government which
 shall hereafter be created by the General Assembly. (Def. amended Dec. 14, 1992, P.L.815,
 No.131)
 "No-impact home-based business," a business or commercial activity administered or
 conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential
 dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular
 or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
 of those normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity
 must satisfy the following requirements:
 (1) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property
 and surrounding residential uses.
 (2) The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.
 (3) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory
 of a substantial nature.
 (4) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited
 to, parking, signs or lights.
 (5) The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration,
 glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic interference, including interference
 with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
 (6) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge in volume
 or type which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
 (7) The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy
 more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
 (8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
 (Def. added May 9, 2002, P.L.305, No.43)
 "Nonconforming lot," a lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the
 adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements
 of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
 "Nonconforming structure," a structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed
 to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in a zoning ordinance
 or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed
 prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application
 of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming
 structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
 "Nonconforming use," a use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply
 with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or
 hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment
 of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
 to its location by reason of annexation.
 "Official map," a map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV.
 "Planned residential development," an area of land, controlled by a landowner, to
 be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling units, or combination of
 residential and nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not correspond
 in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density, or intensity, lot coverage and
 required open space to the regulations established in any one district created, from
 time to time, under the provisions of a municipal zoning ordinance.
 "Planning agency," a planning commission, planning department, or a planning committee
 of the governing body.
 "Plat," the map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary
 or final.
 "Preservation or protection," when used in connection with natural and historic resources,
 shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive
 use but shall not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry,
 mining or other lawful uses of natural resources. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.495,
 No.68)
 "Prime agricultural land," land used for agricultural purposes that contains soils
 of the first, second or third class as defined by the United States Department of
 Agriculture Natural Resource and Conservation Services County Soil Survey. (Def. added
 June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Professional consultants," persons who provide expert or professional advice, including, but not limited to,
 architects, attorneys, certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
 landscape architects or planners. (Def. added Nov. 30, 2004, P.L.1613, No.206)
 "Public grounds," includes:
 (1) parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
 (2) sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated
 facilities; and
 (3) publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
 "Public hearing," a formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the governing
 body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking
 action in accordance with this act.
 "Public infrastructure area," a designated growth area and all or any portion of a
 future growth area described in a county or multimunicipal comprehensive plan where
 public infrastructure services will be provided and outside of which such public infrastructure
 services will not be required to be publicly financed. (Def. added June 22, 2000,
 P.L.483, No.67)
 "Public infrastructure services," services that are provided to areas with densities
 of one or more units to the acre, which may include sanitary sewers and facilities
 for the collection and treatment of sewage, water lines and facilities for the pumping
 and treating of water, parks and open space, streets and sidewalks, public transportation
 and other services that may be appropriate within a growth area, but shall exclude
 fire protection and emergency medical services and any other service required to protect
 the health and safety of residents. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "Public meeting," a forum held pursuant to notice under 65 Pa.C.S. Ch. 7 (relating
 to open meetings). (Def. amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Public notice," notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
 of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place
 of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
 The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall
 not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
 "Regional planning agency," a planning agency that is comprised of representatives
 of more than one county. Regional planning responsibilities shall include providing
 technical assistance to counties and municipalities, mediating conflicts across county
 lines and reviewing county comprehensive plans for consistency with one another. (Def.
 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Renewable energy source," any method, process or substance whose supply is rejuvenated
 through natural processes and, subject to those natural processes, remains relatively
 constant, including, but not limited to, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, solar
 and wind energy and hydroelectric energy and excluding those sources of energy used
 in the fission and fusion processes.
 "Rural resource area," an area described in a municipal or multimunicipal plan within
 which rural resource uses including, but not limited to, agriculture, timbering, mining,
 quarrying and other extractive industries, forest and game lands and recreation and
 tourism are encouraged and enhanced, development that is compatible with or supportive
 of such uses is permitted and public infrastructure services are not provided except
 in villages. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "Special exception," a use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the
 provisions of Articles VI and IX.
 "Specific plan," a detailed plan for nonresidential development of an area covered
 by a municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive plan, which, when approved and adopted
 by the participating municipalities through ordinances and agreements, supersedes
 all other applicable ordinances. (Def. added June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "State Land Use and Growth Management Report," a comprehensive land use and growth
 management report to be prepared by the Center for Local Government Services and which
 shall contain information, data and conclusions regarding growth and development patterns
 in this Commonwealth and which will offer recommendations to Commonwealth agencies
 for coordination of executive action, regulation and programs. (Def. added June 22,
 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 "Street," includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane,
 alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic
 or pedestrians whether public or private.
 "Structure," any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or
 in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
 "Subdivision," the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any
 means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including
 changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
 partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership
 or building or lot development: Provided, however, That the subdivision by lease of
 land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten acres, not involving
 any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
 "Substantially completed," where, in the judgment of the municipal engineer, at least
 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security was
 posted pursuant to section 509) of those improvements required as a condition for
 final approval have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
 project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
 "Traditional neighborhood development," an area of land typically developed for a
 compatible mixture of residential units for various income levels and nonresidential
 commercial and workplace uses, including some structures that provide for a mix of
 uses within the same building. Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings
 and parks are interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively
 close proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood development is relatively
 compact and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an identifiable center and
 a discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood is in the form of a public park,
 commons, plaza, square or prominent intersection of two or more major streets. Generally,
 there is a hierarchy of streets laid out with an interconnected network of streets
 and blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and are appropriately
 designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles equally. (Def. amended Nov.
 23, 2010, P.L.1101, No.111)
 "Transferable development rights," the attaching of development rights to specified
 lands which are desired by a municipality to be kept undeveloped, but permitting those
 rights to be transferred from those lands so that the development potential which
 they represent may occur on other lands where more intensive development is deemed
 to be appropriate. (Def. amended Dec. 14, 1992, P.L.815, No.131)
 "Variance," relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX.
 "Village," an unincorporated settlement that is part of a township where residential
 and mixed use densities of one unit to the acre or more exist or are permitted and
 commercial, industrial or institutional uses exist or are permitted. (Def. added June
 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 "Water survey," an inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of groundwater
 and surface-water resources within a municipality.
 (b) The following words and phrases when used in Articles IX and X-A shall have the meanings
 given to them in this subsection unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
 "Board," any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or under this act
 to render final adjudications.
 "Decision," final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under
 any land use ordinance or this act to do so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive
 jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable
 to the court of common pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the municipality
 lies.
 "Determination," final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the administration
 of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder, except the following:
 (1) the governing body;
 (2) the zoning hearing board; or
 (3) the planning agency, only if and to the extent the planning agency is charged with
 final decision on preliminary or final plans under the subdivision and land development
 ordinance or planned residential development provisions.
 Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as having jurisdiction
 for such appeal.
 "Hearing," an administrative proceeding conducted by a board pursuant to section 909.1.
 "Land use ordinance," any ordinance or map adopted pursuant to the authority granted
 in Articles IV, V, VI and VII.
 "Report," any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by any
 body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to any other body, board,
 officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of such report in
 the rendering of any decision or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory
 and advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body
 or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered
 by the body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
 be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding
 upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.
 19680247u108s
 Section 108. Optional Notice of Ordinance or Decision; Procedural Validity Challenges.--(a) It is the intent of this section to allow optional public notice of municipal action
 in order to provide an opportunity to challenge, in accordance with section 1002-A(b)
 or section 1002.1-A, the validity of an ordinance or decision on the basis that a
 defect in procedure resulted in a deprivation of constitutional rights, and to establish
 a period of limitations for raising such challenges.
 (b) Notice that municipal action has been taken to adopt an ordinance or enter a decision,
 regardless of whether the municipal action was taken before or after the effective
 date of this section, may be provided through publication, at any time, once each
 week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
 by the following:
 (1) The governing body of the municipality.
 (2) In the case of an ordinance, any resident or landowner in the municipality.
 (3) In the case of a decision, the applicant requesting the decision or the landowner
 or successor in interest of the property subject to or affected by the decision.
 (c) Each notice shall contain the following:
 (1) If the notice relates to an ordinance:
 (i) The municipality's ordinance number.
 (ii) A brief statement of the general content of the ordinance.
 (iii) The address of the municipal building where the full text of the ordinance may be
 reviewed by members of the public.
 (2) If the notice relates to a decision:
 (i) The name of the applicant or owner of the subject property.
 (ii) The street address or location of the subject property.
 (iii) The file number or docket number of the decision.
 (iv) A brief description of the nature of the decision.
 (v) The date upon which the decision was issued.
 (vi) The address of the municipal building where the full text of the decision may be reviewed
 by members of the public.
 (3) In addition to the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2), the publication of each
 notice authorized by the section shall contain a statement that the publication is
 intended to provide notification of an ordinance or decision and that any person claiming
 a right to challenge the validity of the ordinance or decision must bring a legal
 action within 30 days of the publication of the second notice.
 (4) The person providing notice as authorized by this section shall provide proof of publication
 to the municipality adopting the ordinance or decision for retention with municipal
 records. Failure to comply with this paragraph shall not invalidate any notice provided
 in accordance with this section or the applicability of the period of limitation in
 subsection (d).
 (d) Notwithstanding this or any other act, in order to provide certainty of the validity
 of an ordinance or decision, any appeal or action contesting the validity of an ordinance
 based on a procedural defect in the process of enactment or the validity of a decision
 based on a procedural or substantive defect shall be dismissed, with prejudice, as
 untimely if not filed within the 30th day following the second publication of the
 notice authorized in this section.
 (e) Any appeal or action filed within the 30-day period referred to in subsection (d)
 shall be taken to the court of common pleas and shall be conducted in accordance with
 and subject to the procedures set forth in 42 Pa.C.S. § 5571.1 (relating to appeals
 from ordinances, resolutions, maps, etc.) in the case of challenges to ordinances
 or section 1002.1-A in the case of challenges to decisions.
 (f) Where no appeal or action contesting the procedural validity of an ordinance or the
 procedural or substantive validity of a decision is filed within the period set forth
 in subsection (d), the ordinance or decision shall be deemed to be reaffirmed and
 reissued on the date of the second publication of the optional notice permitted under
 this section.
 (g) An appeal shall be exempt from the time limitation in subsection (d) only if the party
 bringing the appeal establishes that the application of the time limitation in subsection
 (d) would result in an unconstitutional deprivation of due process.
 (h) Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate, repeal, extend or otherwise
 modify the time for appeal as set forth in section 1002-A, where the appellant was
 a party to proceedings prior to the entry of a decision or otherwise had an adequate
 opportunity to bring a timely action in accordance with section 1002-A to contest
 the procedural validity of an ordinance or the procedural or substantive validity
 of a decision.
 (108 added July 4, 2008, P.L.319, No.39)
 19680247u108v
 Compiler's Note: Section 6 of Act 39 of 2008, which added section 108, provided that section 108 shall
 apply beginning on the effective date of an amendment to 42 Pa.C.S. that provides
 for appeals from ordinances, resolutions, maps and similar actions of a political
 subdivision. Section 5571.1 of Title 42 (relating to appeals from ordinances, resolutions,
 maps, etc.) was added July 4, 2008, P.L.325, No.40, effective immediately.
 19680247u109s
 Section 109. Notice.--In any case in which mailed notice or electronic notice is required by this
 act, the following shall apply:
 (1) An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or an owner of
 the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within a municipality may request
 that the municipality provide written or electronic notice of a public hearing which
 may affect such tract or parcel of land.
 (2) Mailed notice shall be required only if an owner of a tract or parcel of land located
 within a municipality or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land
 within the municipality has made a written request that the notice be mailed and has
 supplied the municipality with a stamped, self-addressed envelope prior to a public
 hearing.
 (3) Electronic notice shall be required only if an owner of a tract or parcel of land
 located within a municipality or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel
 of land within the municipality has made a written request that notice be sent electronically
 and has supplied the municipality with an electronic address prior to a public hearing
 and only if that municipality maintains the capability of generating an electronic
 notice. An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or an
 owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality making
 the request and supplying an electronic address may at any time notify the municipality
 that the owner of the tract or parcel of land located within the municipality or the
 owner of the mineral rights in the tract or parcel of land within the municipality
 no longer will accept electronic notice, and, in that event, the municipality may
 no longer provide electronic notice.
 (4) An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or an owner of
 the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality who has requested
 a mailed notice shall be solely responsible for the number, accuracy and sufficiency
 of the envelopes supplied. The municipality shall not be responsible or liable if
 the owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or an owner of
 the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality does not provide
 to the municipality notice of any changes in the owner's mailing address.
 (5) An owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or an owner of
 the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality who has requested
 electronic notice shall be solely responsible for the accuracy and functioning of
 the electronic address provided to the municipality. The municipality shall not be
 responsible or liable if the owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality
 or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality
 does not provide to the municipality notice of any changes to the owner's electronic
 address.
 (6) A municipality shall deposit a mailed notice in the United States mail or provide
 electronic notice not more than 30 and not less than seven days prior to the scheduled
 date of the hearing as shown on the notice.
 (7) For each public hearing, the municipal secretary or zoning officer shall prepare,
 sign and maintain a list of all mailed notices, mailing dates, electronic notices
 and electronic notice dates. The signed list shall constitute a presumption that the
 notice was given.
 (8) The mailed notice shall be deemed received by an owner of a tract or parcel of land
 located within a municipality or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel
 of land within the municipality on the date deposited in the United States mail.
 (9) The electronic notice shall be deemed received by an owner of a tract or parcel of
 land located within a municipality or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or
 parcel of land within the municipality on the date the municipality electronically
 notifies the owner.
 (10) Failure of an owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or
 an owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality
 to receive a requested mailed notice or electronic notice shall not be deemed to invalidate
 any action or proceedings under this act.
 (109 added July 2, 2013, P.L.201, No.36)
 19680247u110s
 Section 110. Certain Transmittals and Submissions to Governmental Bodies.--If this act requires
 a municipality, including a county, to forward, send or submit a proposed comprehensive
 plan or amendment or a proposed land use ordinance or amendment for review, comments
 or recommendations, or an adopted comprehensive plan, land use ordinance or amendment,
 the proposed or adopted plan, ordinance or amendment may be transmitted electronically.
 The transmittal may include an electronic document or a link to a publicly accessible
 document online, provided the electronic document is in PDF format or similar standard
 which accurately reproduces the original. In the event a document is required by this
 act to be certified, the certification shall also be transmitted electronically. The
 following shall apply:
 (1) The municipality shall transmit documents to those electronic contacts available and
 reasonably appropriate for receipt of the documents. Failure of a governmental body
 or an officer or agent of a governmental body to receive a good faith transmittal
 provided in accordance with this paragraph may not be grounds to challenge the effectiveness
 of a plan, ordinance or amendment under this act.
 (2) The municipality shall retain a written or electronic record of every transmittal
 and all comments and recommendations under paragraph (3).
 (3) If an authorized transmittal is for comments or recommendations under this act, the
 comments and recommendations may be transmitted to the municipality electronically.
 (110 added July 8, 2024, P.L.522, No.44)
 19680247u110v
 Compiler's Note: Section 2 of Act 44 of 2024 provided that nothing in Act 44 shall be deemed to invalidate any electronic transmittal of plans,
 ordinances or amendments made prior to the effective date of section 2.
 19680247u201h
 ARTICLE II
 Planning Agencies
 19680247u201s
 Section 201. Creation of Planning Agencies.--The governing body of any municipality shall have
 the power to create or abolish, by ordinance, a planning commission or planning department,
 or both. An ordinance which creates both a planning commission and a planning department
 shall specify which of the powers and duties conferred on planning agencies by this
 act; each shall exercise and may confer upon each additional powers, duties and advisory
 functions not inconsistent with this act. In lieu of a planning commission or planning
 department, the governing body may elect to assign the powers and duties conferred
 by this act upon a planning committee comprised of members appointed from the governing
 body. The engineer for the municipality, or an engineer appointed by the governing
 body, shall serve the planning agency as engineering advisor. The solicitor for the
 municipality, or an attorney appointed by the governing body, shall serve the planning
 agency as legal advisor.
 19680247u202s
 Section 202. Planning Commission.--If the governing body of any municipality shall elect to create
 a planning commission, such commission shall have not less than three nor more than
 nine members. Except for elected or appointed officers or employees of the municipality,
 members of the commission may receive compensation in an amount fixed by the governing
 body. Compensation shall not exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid
 to members of the governing body. Without exception, members of the planning commission
 may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable expenses. However, elected or appointed
 officers or employees of the municipality shall not, by reason of membership thereon,
 forfeit the right to exercise the powers, perform the duties or receive the compensations
 of the municipal offices held by them during such membership.
 (Sec. 202 amended Jan. 11, 2002, P.L.13, No.2)
 19680247u203s
 Section 203. Appointment, Term and Vacancy.--(a) All members of the commission shall be appointed by the appointing authority of the
 municipality. All such appointments shall be approved by the governing body, except
 where the governing body is the appointing authority.
 (b) The term of each of the members of the commission shall be for four years, or until
 his successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms of the members first
 appointed pursuant to this act shall be so fixed that on commissions of eight members
 or less no more than two shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar
 year, and on commissions of nine members no more than three shall be so reappointed
 or replaced.
 (c) The chairman of the planning commission shall promptly notify the appointing authority
 of the municipality concerning vacancies in the commission, and such vacancy shall
 be filled for the unexpired term. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration
 of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term according to the
 terms of this article.
 (d) Should the governing body of any municipality determine to increase the number of
 members of an already existing planning commission, the additional members shall be
 appointed as provided in this article. If the governing body of any municipality shall
 determine to reduce the number of members on any existing planning commission, such
 reduction shall be effectuated by allowing the terms to expire and by making no new
 appointments to fill the vacancy. Any reduction or increase shall be by ordinance.
 (e) The governing body may appoint by resolution at least one but no more than three residents
 of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the planning commission. The
 term of office of an alternate member shall be four years. When seated pursuant to
 the provisions of section 207, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all
 proceedings and discussions of the commission to the same and full extent as provided
 by law for commission members, including, specifically, the right to cast a vote as
 a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set
 forth in this act and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall not serve as
 a member of the zoning hearing board or as a zoning officer. Any alternate may participate
 in any proceeding or discussion of the commission but shall not be entitled to vote
 as a member of the commission nor be reimbursed pursuant to section 202 unless designated
 as a voting alternate member pursuant to section 207. ((e) added Oct. 7, 2015, P.L.176,
 No.42)
 19680247u204s
 Section 204. Members of Existing Commissions.--(204 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u205s
 Section 205. Membership.--All of the members of the planning commission shall be residents of the
 municipality. On all planning commissions appointed pursuant to this act, a certain
 number of the members, designated as citizen members shall not be officers or employees
 of the municipality. On a commission of three members at least two shall be citizen
 members. On a commission of four or five members at least three shall be citizen members.
 On a commission of either six or seven members at least five shall be citizen members,
 and on commissions of either eight or nine members at least six shall be citizen members.
 19680247u206s
 Section 206. Removal.--Any member of a planning commission once qualified and appointed may be
 removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other
 just cause by a majority vote of the governing body taken after the member has received
 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held
 in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing. Any appointment
 to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be only for the unexpired term.
 19680247u207s
 Section 207. Conduct of Business.--(a) The commission shall elect its own chairman and vice-chairman and create and fill
 such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and may
 succeed themselves. The commission may make and alter by laws and rules and regulations
 to govern its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the municipality and the
 laws of the Commonwealth. The commission shall keep a full record of its business
 and shall annually make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities
 to the governing body. Interim reports may be made as often as may be necessary, or
 as requested by the governing body.
 (b) The chairman of the planning commission may designate alternate members of the commission
 to substitute for any absent member or member who has recused himself or has been
 disqualified by the governing body, and, if, by reason of absence, recusal or disqualification
 of a member, a quorum is not reached, the chairman of the commission shall designate
 as many alternate members of the commission to sit on the commission as may be needed
 to reach a quorum. Any alternate member of the commission shall continue to serve
 on the commission in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
 was initially appointed until the commission has made a final decision on the matter
 or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case
 basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
 (207 amended Oct. 7, 2015, P.L.176, No.42)
 19680247u208s
 Section 208. Planning Department Director.--For the administration of each planning department,
 the appointing authority may appoint a director of planning who shall be, in the opinion
 of the appointing authority, qualified for the duties of his position. Each such appointment
 shall be with the approval of the governing body, except where the governing body
 is the appointing authority. The director of planning shall be in charge of the administration
 of the department, and shall exercise the powers and be subject to the duties that
 are granted or imposed on a planning agency by this act, except that where a municipality
 creates both a planning commission and a planning department, the director of planning
 shall exercise only those powers and be subject to only those duties which are specifically
 conferred upon him by ordinance enacted pursuant to this article.
 19680247u209.1s
 Section 209.1. Powers and Duties of Planning Agency.--(a) The planning agency shall at the request of the governing body have the power and
 shall be required to:
 (1) Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the municipality as set forth
 in this act, and present it for the consideration of the governing body.
 (2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files of the planning
 agency shall be in the possession of the governing body.
 (b) The planning agency at the request of the governing body may:
 (1) Make recommendations to the governing body concerning the adoption or amendment of
 an official map.
 (2) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a zoning ordinance,
 and make recommendations to the governing body on proposed amendments to it as set
 forth in this act.
 (3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land development and planned residential
 development regulations, as set forth in this act.
 (4) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a building code and
 a housing code and make recommendations concerning proposed amendments thereto.
 (5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill the duties
 and obligations imposed by this act.
 (6) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality an environmental study.
 (7) Submit to the governing body of a municipality a recommended capital improvements
 program.
 (7.1) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a water survey, which
 shall be consistent with the State Water Plan and any applicable water resources plan
 adopted by a river basin commission. The water survey shall be conducted in consultation
 with any public water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
 (8) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the comprehensive plan and planning.
 (9) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies and individuals as
 to the effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies and individuals.
 (10) Hold public hearings and meetings.
 (10.1) Present testimony before any board.
 (11) Require from other departments and agencies of the municipality such available information
 as relates to the work of the planning agency.
 (12) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make examinations and
 surveys with the consent of the owner.
 (13) Prepare and present to the governing body of the municipality a study regarding the
 feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy sources in specific areas
 within the municipality.
 (14) Review the zoning ordinance, subdivision and land development ordinance, official
 map, provisions for planned residential development, and such other ordinances and
 regulations governing the development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
 comprehensive plan.
 19680247u210s
 Section 210. Administrative and Technical Assistance.--The appointing authority may employ administrative
 and technical services to aid in carrying out the provisions of this act either as
 consultants on particular matters or as regular employees of the municipality. A county
 planning agency, with the consent of its governing body may perform planning services
 for any municipality whose governing body requests such assistance and may enter into
 agreements or contracts for such work.
 19680247u211s
 Section 211. Assistance.--The planning agency may, with the consent of the governing body, accept
 and utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance made available by the county,
 the Commonwealth or the Federal government or any of their agencies, or from private
 sources. The governing body may enter into agreements or contracts regarding the acceptance
 or utilization of the funds or assistance in accordance with the governmental procedures
 of the municipality.
 19680247u212s
 Section 212. Intergovernmental Cooperation.--For the purposes of this act, the governing body may
 utilize the authority granted under 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2303(a) (relating to intergovernmental
 cooperation authorized) and 2315 (relating to effect of joint cooperation agreements).
 (212 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u301h
 ARTICLE III
 Comprehensive Plan
 19680247u301s
 Section 301. Preparation of Comprehensive Plan--(a) The municipal, multimunicipal or county comprehensive plan, consisting of maps, charts
 and textual matter, shall include, but need not be limited to, the following related
 basic elements:
 (1) A statement of objectives of the municipality concerning its future development, including,
 but not limited to, the location, character and timing of future development, that
 may also serve as a statement of community development objectives as provided in section
 606.
 (2) A plan for land use, which may include provisions for the amount, intensity, character
 and timing of land use proposed for residence, industry, business, agriculture, major
 traffic and transit facilities, utilities, community facilities, public grounds, parks
 and recreation, preservation of prime agricultural lands, flood plains and other areas
 of special hazards and other similar uses.
 (2.1) A plan to meet the housing needs of present residents and of those individuals and
 families anticipated to reside in the municipality, which may include conservation
 of presently sound housing, rehabilitation of housing in declining neighborhoods and
 the accommodation of expected new housing in different dwelling types and at appropriate
 densities for households of all income levels.
 (3) A plan for movement of people and goods, which may include expressways, highways,
 local street systems, parking facilities, pedestrian and bikeway systems, public transit
 routes, terminals, airfields, port facilities, railroad facilities and other similar
 facilities or uses.
 (4) A plan for community facilities and utilities, which may include public and private
 education, recreation, municipal buildings, fire and police stations, libraries, hospitals,
 water supply and distribution, sewerage and waste treatment, solid waste management,
 storm drainage, and flood plain management, utility corridors and associated facilities,
 and other similar facilities or uses.
 (4.1) A statement of the interrelationships among the various plan components, which may
 include an estimate of the environmental, energy conservation, fiscal, economic development
 and social consequences on the municipality.
 (4.2) A discussion of short- and long-range plan implementation strategies, which may include
 implications for capital improvements programming, new or updated development regulations,
 and identification of public funds potentially available.
 (5) A statement indicating that the existing and proposed development of the municipality
 is compatible with the existing and proposed development and plans in contiguous portions
 of neighboring municipalities, or a statement indicating measures which have been
 taken to provide buffers or other transitional devices between disparate uses, and
 a statement indicating that the existing and proposed development of the municipality
 is generally consistent with the objectives and plans of the county comprehensive
 plan.
 (6) A plan for the protection of natural and historic resources to the extent not preempted
 by Federal or State law. This clause includes, but is not limited to, wetlands and
 aquifer recharge zones, woodlands, steep slopes, prime agricultural land, flood plains,
 unique natural areas and historic sites. The plan shall be consistent with and may
 not exceed those requirements imposed under the following:
 (i) act of June 22, 1937 (P.L.1987, No.394), known as "The Clean Streams Law";
 (ii) act of May 31, 1945 (P.L.1198, No.418), known as the "Surface Mining Conservation
 and Reclamation Act";
 (iii) act of April 27, 1966 (1st Sp.Sess., P.L.31, No.1), known as "The Bituminous Mine
 Subsidence and Land Conservation Act";
 (iv) act of September 24, 1968 (P.L.1040, No.318), known as the "Coal Refuse Disposal Control
 Act";
 (v) act of December 19, 1984 (P.L.1140, No.223), known as the "Oil and Gas Act";
 (vi) act of December 19, 1984 (P.L.1093, No.219), known as the "Noncoal Surface Mining
 Conservation and Reclamation Act";
 (vii) act of June 30, 1981 (P.L.128, No.43), known as the "Agricultural Area Security Law";
 (viii) act of June 10, 1982 (P.L.454, No.133), entitled "An act protecting agricultural operations
 from nuisance suits and ordinances under certain circumstances"; and
 (ix) act of May 20, 1993 (P.L.12, No.6), known as the "Nutrient Management Act," regardless
 of whether any agricultural operation within the area to be affected by the plan is
 a concentrated animal operation as defined under the act.
 (7) In addition to any other requirements of this act, a county comprehensive plan shall:
 (i) Identify land uses as they relate to important natural resources and appropriate utilization
 of existing minerals.
 (ii) Identify current and proposed land uses which have a regional impact and significance,
 such as large shopping centers, major industrial parks, mines and related activities,
 office parks, storage facilities, large residential developments, regional entertainment
 and recreational complexes, hospitals, airports and port facilities.
 (iii) Identify a plan for the preservation and enhancement of prime agricultural land and
 encourage the compatibility of land use regulation with existing agricultural operations.
 (iv) Identify a plan for historic preservation.
 (b) The comprehensive plan shall include a plan for the reliable supply of water, considering
 current and future water resources availability, uses and limitations, including provisions
 adequate to protect water supply sources. Any such plan shall be generally consistent
 with the State Water Plan and any applicable water resources plan adopted by a river
 basin commission. It shall also contain a statement recognizing that:
 (1) Lawful activities such as extraction of minerals may impact water supply sources and
 such activities are governed by statutes regulating mineral extraction that specify
 replacement and restoration of water supplies affected by such activities.
 (2) Commercial agriculture production may impact water supply sources.
 (c) The municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive plan shall be reviewed at least every
 ten years. The municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive plan shall be sent to the
 governing bodies of contiguous municipalities for review and comment and shall also
 be sent to the Center for Local Government Services for informational purposes. The
 municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive plan shall also be sent to the county planning
 commissions or, upon request of a county planning commission, a regional planning
 commission when the comprehensive plan is updated or at ten-year intervals, whichever
 comes first, for review and comment on whether the municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive
 plan remains generally consistent with the county comprehensive plan and to indicate
 where the local plan may deviate from the county comprehensive plan.
 (d) The municipal, multimunicipal or county comprehensive plan may identify those areas
 where growth and development will occur so that a full range of public infrastructure
 services, including sewer, water, highways, police and fire protection, public schools,
 parks, open space and other services can be adequately planned and provided as needed
 to accommodate growth.
 (301 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u301.1s
 Section 301.1. Energy Conservation Plan Element.--To promote energy conservation and the effective
 utilization of renewable energy sources, the comprehensive plan may include an energy
 conservation plan element which systematically analyzes the impact of each other component
 and element of the comprehensive plan on the present and future use of energy in the
 municipality, details specific measures contained in the other plan elements designed
 to reduce energy consumption and proposes other measures that the municipality may
 take to reduce energy consumption and to promote the effective utilization of renewable
 energy sources.
 19680247u301.2s
 Section 301.2. Surveys by Planning Agency.--In preparing the comprehensive plan, the planning agency
 shall make careful surveys, studies and analyses of housing, demographic, and economic
 characteristics and trends; amount, type and general location and interrelationships
 of different categories of land use; general location and extent of transportation
 and community facilities; natural features affecting development; natural, historic
 and cultural resources; and the prospects for future growth in the municipality.
 19680247u301.3s
 Section 301.3. Submission of Plan to County Planning Agency.--If a county planning agency has been
 created for the county in which the municipality is located, then at least 45 days
 prior to the public hearing required in section 302 on the comprehensive plan or amendment
 thereof, the municipality shall forward a copy of that plan or amendment to the county
 planning agency for its comments. At the same time, the municipality shall also forward
 copies of the proposed plan or amendment to all contiguous municipalities and to the
 local school district for their review and comments.
 19680247u301.4s
 Section 301.4. Compliance by Counties.--(a) If a county does not have a comprehensive plan, then that county shall, within three
 years of the effective date of this act and with the opportunity for the review, comment
 and participation of the municipalities and school districts within the respective
 county and contiguous counties, school districts and municipalities, prepare and adopt
 a comprehensive plan in accordance with the requirements of section 301. Municipal
 comprehensive plans which are adopted shall be generally consistent with the adopted
 county comprehensive plan.
 (b) County planning commissions shall publish advisory guidelines to promote general consistency
 with the adopted county comprehensive plan. These guidelines shall promote uniformity
 with respect to local planning and zoning terminology and common types of municipal
 land use regulations.
 (301.4 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u301.5s
 Section 301.5. Funding of Municipal Planning.--Priority for State grants to develop or revise comprehensive
 plans shall be given to those municipalities which agree to adopt comprehensive plans
 generally consistent with the county comprehensive plan and which agree to enact a
 new zoning ordinance or amendment which would fully implement the municipal comprehensive
 plan. No more than 25% of the total funds available for these grants shall be disbursed
 under priority status pursuant to this provision. Municipalities and counties shall
 comply with these agreements within three years. Failure to comply with the agreements
 shall be taken into consideration for future State funding.
 (301.5 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u302s
 Section 302. Adoption of Municipal, Multimunicipal and County Comprehensive Plans and Plan Amendments.--(a) The governing body may adopt and amend the comprehensive plan as a whole or in part.
 Before adopting or amending a comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, the planning
 agency shall hold at least one public meeting before forwarding the proposed comprehensive
 plan or amendment thereof to the governing body. In reviewing the proposed comprehensive
 plan, the governing body shall consider the comments of the county, contiguous municipalities
 and the school district, as well as the public meeting comments and the recommendations
 of the municipal planning agency. The comments of the county, contiguous municipalities
 and the local school district shall be made to the governing body within 45 days of
 receipt by the governing body, and the proposed plan or amendment thereto shall not
 be acted upon until such comment is received. If, however, the contiguous municipalities
 and the local school district fail to respond within 45 days, the governing body may
 proceed without their comments.
 (a.1) The governing body of the county may adopt and amend the county comprehensive plan
 in whole or in part. Before adopting or amending a comprehensive plan, or any part
 thereof, the county planning agency shall hold at least one public meeting before
 forwarding the proposed comprehensive plan or amendment thereof to the governing body.
 In reviewing the proposed comprehensive plan, the governing body shall consider the
 comments of municipalities and school districts within the county and contiguous school
 districts, municipalities and counties as well as the public meeting comments and
 the recommendations of the county planning agency. The comments of the counties, municipalities
 and school districts shall be made to the governing body within 45 days of receipt
 by the governing body, and the proposed comprehensive plan or amendment thereto shall
 not be acted upon until such comment is received. If, however, the counties, municipalities
 and school districts fail to respond within 45 days, the governing body may proceed
 without their comments.
 (b) The governing body shall hold at least one public hearing pursuant to public notice.
 If, after the public hearing held upon the proposed plan or amendment to the plan,
 the proposed plan or proposed amendment thereto is substantially revised, the governing
 body shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding
 to vote on the plan or amendment thereto.
 (c) The adoption of the comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, or any amendment thereto,
 shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority
 of all the members of the governing body. The resolution shall refer expressly to
 the maps, charts, textual matter, and other matters intended to form the whole or
 part of the plan, and the action shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part.
 (d) Counties shall in accordance with subsection (a.1) consider amendments to their comprehensive
 plan proposed by municipalities which are considering adoption or revision of their
 municipal comprehensive plans so as to achieve general consistency between the respective
 plans. County comprehensive plans shall be updated at least every ten years. Where
 two or more contiguous municipalities request amendments to a county comprehensive
 plan for the purpose of achieving general consistency between the municipal plans
 or multimunicipal plan and the county comprehensive plan, the county must accept the
 amendments unless good cause for their refusal is established.
 (302 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u303s
 Section 303. Legal Status of Comprehensive Plan Within the Jurisdiction that Adopted the Plan.--(a) Whenever the governing body, pursuant to the procedures provided in section 302, has
 adopted a comprehensive plan or any part thereof, any subsequent proposed action of
 the governing body, its departments, agencies and appointed authorities shall be submitted
 to the planning agency for its recommendations when the proposed action relates to:
 (1) the location, opening, vacation, extension, widening, narrowing or enlargement of
 any street, public ground, pierhead or watercourse;
 (2) the location, erection, demolition, removal or sale of any public structure located
 within the municipality;
 (3) the adoption, amendment or repeal of an official map, subdivision and land development
 ordinance, zoning ordinance or provisions for planned residential development, or
 capital improvements program; or
 (4) the construction, extension or abandonment of any water line, sewer line or sewage
 treatment facility.
 (b) The recommendations of the planning agency including a specific statement as to whether
 or not the proposed action is in accordance with the objectives of the formally adopted
 comprehensive plan shall be made in writing to the governing body within 45 days.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, no action by the governing body of
 a municipality shall be invalid nor shall the same be subject to challenge or appeal
 on the basis that such action is inconsistent with, or fails to comply with, the provision
 of a comprehensive plan.
 (d) Municipal zoning, subdivision and land development regulations and capital improvement
 programs shall generally implement the municipal and multimunicipal comprehensive
 plan or, where none exists, the municipal statement of community development objectives.
 (303 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u304s
 Section 304. Legal Status of County Comprehensive Plans Within Municipalities.--(a) Following the adoption of a comprehensive plan or any part thereof by a county, pursuant
 to the procedures in section 302, any proposed action of the governing body of a municipality,
 its departments, agencies and appointed authorities within the county shall be submitted
 to the county planning agency for its recommendations if the proposed action relates
 to:
 (1) the location, opening, vacation, extension, widening, narrowing or enlargement of
 any street, public ground, pierhead or watercourse;
 (2) the location, erection, demolition, removal or sale of any public structures located
 within the municipality;
 (3) the adoption, amendment or repeal of any comprehensive plan, official map, subdivision
 or land ordinance, zoning ordinance or provisions for planned residential development;
 or
 (4) the construction, extension or abandonment of any water line, sewer line or sewage
 treatment facility.
 (b) The recommendation of the planning agency shall be made to the governing body of the
 municipality within 45 days and the proposed action shall not be taken until such
 recommendation is made. If, however, the planning agency fails to act within 45 days,
 the governing body shall proceed without its recommendation.
 19680247u305s
 Section 305. The Legal Status of Comprehensive Plans Within School Districts.--Following the adoption
 of a comprehensive plan or any part thereof by any municipality or county governing
 body, pursuant to the procedures in section 302, any proposed action of the governing
 body of any public school district located within the municipality or county relating
 to the location, demolition, removal, sale or lease of any school district structure
 or land shall be submitted to the municipal and county planning agencies for their
 recommendations at least 45 days prior to the execution of such proposed action by
 the governing body of the school district.
 19680247u306s
 Section 306. Municipal and County Comprehensive Plans.--(a) When a municipality having a comprehensive plan is located in a county which has adopted
 a comprehensive plan, both the county and the municipality shall each give the plan
 of the other consideration in order that the objectives of each plan can be protected
 to the greatest extent possible.
 (b) Within 30 days after adoption, the governing body of a municipality, other than a
 county, shall forward a certified copy of the comprehensive plan, or part thereof
 or amendment thereto, to the county planning agency or, in counties where no planning
 agency exists, to the governing body of the county in which the municipality is located.
 (c) Counties shall consult with municipalities and solicit comment from school districts,
 municipal authorities, the Center for Local Government Services, for informational
 purposes, and public utilities during the process of preparing or updating a county
 comprehensive plan in order to determine future growth needs.
 (306 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u307s
 Section 307. State Land Use and Growth Management Report.--The Center for Local Government Services
 shall issue a Land Use and Growth Management Report by the year 2005 and shall review
 and update the report at five-year intervals.
 (307 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u401h
 ARTICLE IV
 Official Map
 19680247u401s
 Section 401. Grant of Power.--(a) The governing body of each municipality shall have the power to make or cause to be
 made an official map of all or a portion of the municipality which may show appropriate
 elements or portions of elements of the comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to section
 302 with regard to public lands and facilities, and which may include, but need not
 be limited to:
 (1) Existing and proposed public streets, watercourses and public grounds, including widenings,
 narrowings, extensions, diminutions, openings or closing of same.
 (2) Existing and proposed public parks, playgrounds and open space reservations.
 (3) Pedestrian ways and easements.
 (4) Railroad and transit rights-of-way and easements.
 (5) Flood control basins, floodways and flood plains, storm water management areas and
 drainage easements.
 (6) Support facilities, easements and other properties held by public bodies undertaking
 the elements described in section 301.
 (b) For the purposes of taking action under this section, the governing body or its authorized
 designee may make or cause to be made surveys and maps to identify, for the regulatory
 purposes of this article, the location of property, trafficway alignment or utility
 easement by use of property records, aerial photography, photogrammetric mapping or
 other method sufficient for identification, description and publication of the map
 components. For acquisition of lands and easements, boundary descriptions by metes
 and bounds shall be made and sealed by a licensed surveyor.
 19680247u402s
 Section 402. Adoption of the Official Map and Amendments Thereto.--(a) Prior to the adoption of the official map or part thereof, or any amendments to the
 official map, the governing body shall refer the proposed official map, or part thereof
 or amendment thereto, with an accompanying ordinance describing the proposed map,
 to the planning agency for review. The planning agency shall report its recommendations
 on said proposed official map and accompanying ordinance, part thereof, or amendment
 thereto within 45 days unless an extension of time shall be agreed to by the governing
 body. If, however, the planning agency fails to act within 45 days, the governing
 body may proceed without its recommendations.
 (b) The county and adjacent municipalities may offer comments and recommendations during
 said 45-day review period in accordance with section 408. Local authorities, park
 boards, environmental boards and similar public bodies may also offer comments and
 recommendations to the governing body or planning agency if requested by same during
 said 45-day review period. Before voting on the enactment of the proposed ordinance
 and official map, or part thereof or amendment thereto, the governing body shall hold
 a public hearing pursuant to public notice.
 (c) Following adoption of the ordinance and official map, or part thereof or amendment
 thereto, a copy of same, verified by the governing body, shall be submitted to the
 recorder of deeds of the county in which the municipality is located and shall be
 recorded within 60 days of the effective date. The fee for recording and indexing
 ordinances and amendments shall be paid by the municipality enacting the ordinance
 or amendment and shall be in the amount prescribed by law for the recording of ordinances
 by the recorder of deeds.
 19680247u403s
 Section 403. Effect of Approved Plats on Official Map.--After adoption of the official map, or
 part thereof, all streets, watercourses and public grounds and the elements listed
 in section 401 on final, recorded plats which have been approved as provided by this
 act shall be deemed amendments to the official map. Notwithstanding any of the other
 terms of this article, no public hearing need be held or notice given if the amendment
 of the official map is the result of the addition of a plat which has been approved
 as provided by this act.
 19680247u404s
 Section 404. Effect of Official Map on Mapped Streets, Watercourses and Public Grounds.--The adoption
 of any street, street lines or other public lands pursuant to this article as part
 of the official map shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be deemed to constitute
 the opening or establishment of any street nor the taking or acceptance of any land,
 nor shall it obligate the municipality to improve or maintain any such street or land.
 The adoption of proposed watercourses or public grounds as part of the official map
 shall not, in and of itself, constitute or be deemed to constitute a taking or acceptance
 of any land by the municipality.
 19680247u405s
 Section 405. Buildings in Mapped Streets, Watercourses or Other Public Grounds.--For the purpose
 of preserving the integrity of the official map of the municipality, no permit shall
 be issued for any building within the lines of any street, watercourse or public ground
 shown or laid out on the official map. No person shall recover any damages for the
 taking for public use of any building or improvements constructed within the lines
 of any street, watercourse or public ground after the same shall have been included
 in the official map, and any such building or improvement shall be removed at the
 expense of the owner. However, when the property of which the reserved location forms
 a part, cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless a permit shall be granted,
 the owner may apply to the governing body for the grant of a special encroachment
 permit to build. Before granting any special encroachment permit authorized in this
 section, the governing body may submit the application for a special encroachment
 permit to the local planning agency and allow the planning agency 30 days for review
 and comment and shall give public notice and hold a public hearing at which all parties
 in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard. A refusal by the governing body
 to grant the special encroachment permit applied for may be appealed by the applicant
 to the zoning hearing board in the same manner, and within the same time limitation,
 as is provided in Article IX.
 19680247u406s
 Section 406. Time Limitations on Reservations for Future Taking.--The governing body may fix the
 time for which streets, watercourses and public grounds on the official map shall
 be deemed reserved for future taking or acquisition for public use. However, the reservation
 for public grounds shall lapse and become void one year after an owner of such property
 has submitted a written notice to the governing body announcing his intentions to
 build, subdivide or otherwise develop the land covered by the reservation, or has
 made formal application for an official permit to build a structure for private use,
 unless the governing body shall have acquired the property or begun condemnation proceedings
 to acquire such property before the end of the year.
 19680247u407s
 Section 407. Release of Damage Claims or Compensation.--The governing body may designate any of
 its agencies to negotiate with the owner of land under the following circumstances:
 (1) whereon reservations are made;
 (2) whereon releases of claims for damages or compensation for such reservations are required;
 or
 (3) whereon agreements indemnifying the governing body from claims by others may be required.
 Any releases or agreements, when properly executed by the governing body and the owner
 and recorded, shall be binding upon any successor in title.
 19680247u408s
 Section 408. Notice to Other Municipalities.--(a) When any county has adopted an official map in accordance with the terms of this article,
 a certified copy of the map and the ordinances adopting it shall be sent to every
 municipality within said county. All amendments shall be sent to the aforementioned
 municipalities. The powers of the governing bodies of counties to adopt, amend and
 repeal official maps shall be limited to land and watercourses in those municipalities
 wholly or partly within the county which have no official map in effect at the time
 an official map is introduced before the governing body of the county, and until the
 municipal official map is in effect. The adoption of an official map by any municipality,
 other than a county, whose land or watercourses are subject to county official mapping,
 shall act as a repeal protanto of the county official map within the municipality
 adopting such ordinance. Notwithstanding any of the other terms or conditions of this
 section the county official map shall govern as to county streets and public grounds,
 facilities and improvements, even though such streets or public grounds, facilities
 and improvements are located in a municipality which has adopted an official map.
 (b) When a municipality proposes to adopt an official map, or any amendment thereto, a
 copy of the map and the proposed ordinance adopting it, or any amendment thereto,
 shall be forwarded for review to the county planning agency, or if no such agency
 exists to the governing body of the county at the same time it is submitted for review
 to the municipal planning agency. The comments of the county planning agency shall
 be made to the governing body of the municipality within 45 days, and the proposed
 action shall not be taken until such comments are received. If, however, the planning
 agency fails to act within 45 days, the governing body may proceed without its comments.
 (c) Additionally, if any municipality proposes to adopt an official map, or amendment
 thereto, that shows any street or public lands intended to lead into any adjacent
 municipality a copy of said official map or amendment shall be forwarded to such adjacent
 municipality for review and comment by the governing body and planning agency of the
 adjacent municipality. The comments of the adjacent municipality shall be made to
 the governing body of the municipality proposing the adoption within 45 days, and
 the proposed action shall not be taken until such comments are received. If, however,
 the adjacent municipality fails to act within 45 days, the governing body of the proposing
 municipality may proceed without its comments. When a municipality adopts an official
 map, a certified copy of the map, the ordinance adopting it and any later amendments
 shall be forwarded, within 30 days after adoption, to the county planning agency or,
 in counties where no planning agency exists, to the governing body of the county in
 which the municipality is located. Additionally, if any municipality adopts an official
 map, or amendment thereto, that shows any street or public lands intended to lead
 into any adjacent municipality, a certified copy of said official map or amendment
 shall be forwarded to such adjacent municipality.
 19680247u501h
 ARTICLE V
 Subdivision and Land Development
 19680247u501s
 Section 501. Grant of Power.--The governing body of each municipality may regulate subdivisions
 and land development within the municipality by enacting a subdivision and land development
 ordinance. The ordinance shall require that all subdivision and land development plats
 of land situated within the municipality shall be submitted for approval to the governing
 body or, in lieu thereof, to a planning agency designated in the ordinance for this
 purpose, in which case any planning agency action shall be considered as action of
 the governing body. All powers granted herein to the governing body or the planning
 agency shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision and
 land development ordinance. In the case of any development governed by planned residential
 development provisions adopted pursuant to Article VII, however, the applicable provisions
 of the subdivision and land development ordinance shall be as modified by such provisions
 and the procedures which shall be followed in the approval of any plat, and the rights
 and duties of the parties thereto shall be governed by Article VII and the provisions
 adopted thereunder. Provisions regulating mobilehome parks shall be set forth in separate
 and distinct articles of any subdivision and land development ordinance adopted pursuant
 to Article V or any planned residential development provisions adopted pursuant to
 Article VII.
 (501 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u502s
 Section 502. Jurisdiction of County Planning Agencies; Adoption by Reference of County Subdivision
 and Land Development Ordinances.--(a) When any county has adopted a subdivision and land development ordinance in accordance
 with the terms of this article, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be sent to
 every municipality within the county. All amendments shall also be sent to the aforementioned
 municipalities. The powers of governing bodies of counties to enact, amend and repeal
 subdivision and land development ordinances shall be limited to land in those municipalities
 wholly or partly within the county which have no subdivision and land development
 ordinance in effect at the time a subdivision and land development ordinance is introduced
 before the governing body of the county, and until the municipal subdivision and land
 development ordinance is in effect and a certified copy of such ordinance is filed
 with the county planning agency, if one exists.
 (b) The enactment of a subdivision and land development ordinance by any municipality,
 other than a county, whose land is subject to a county subdivision and land development
 ordinance shall act as a repeal protanto of the county subdivision and land development
 ordinance within the municipality adopting such ordinance. However, applications for
 subdivision and land development located within a municipality having adopted a subdivision
 and land development ordinance as set forth in this article shall be forwarded upon
 receipt by the municipality to the county planning agency for review and report together
 with a fee sufficient to cover the costs of the review and report which fee shall
 be paid by the applicant: Provided, That such municipalities shall not approve such
 applications until the county report is received or until the expiration of 30 days
 from the date the application was forwarded to the county.
 (c) Further, any municipality other than a county may adopt by reference the subdivision
 and land development ordinance of the county, and may by separate ordinance designate
 the county planning agency, with the county planning agency's concurrence, as its
 official administrative agency for review and approval of plats.
 19680247u502.1s
 Section 502.1. Contiguous Municipalities.--(a) The county planning commission shall offer a mediation option to any municipality
 which believes that its citizens will experience harm as the result of an applicant's
 proposed subdivision or development of land in a contiguous municipality if the municipalities
 agree. In exercising such an option, the municipalities shall comply with the procedures
 set forth in Article IX. The cost of the mediation shall be shared equally by the
 municipalities unless otherwise agreed. The applicant shall have the right to participate
 in the mediation.
 (b) The governing body of the municipality may appear and comment before the governing
 body of a contiguous municipality and the various boards and commissions of the contiguous
 municipality considering a proposed subdivision, change of land use or land development.
 (502.1 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u503s
 Section 503. Contents of Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.--The subdivision and land
 development ordinance may include, but need not be limited to:
 (1) Provisions for the submittal and processing of plats, including the charging of review
 fees, and specifications for such plats, including certification as to the accuracy
 of plats and provisions for preliminary and final approval and for processing of final
 approval by stages or sections of development. Such plats and surveys shall be prepared
 in accordance with the act of May 23, 1945 (P.L.913, No.367), known as the "Engineer,
 Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law," except that this requirement shall
 not preclude the preparation of a plat in accordance with the act of January 24, 1966
 (1965 P.L.1527, No.535), known as the "Landscape Architects' Registration Law," when
 it is appropriate to prepare the plat using professional services as set forth in
 the definition of the "practice of landscape architecture" under section 2 of that
 act. Review fees may include reasonable and necessary charges by the municipality's
 professional consultants for review and report thereon to the municipality. Such review
 fees shall be based upon a schedule established by ordinance or resolution. Such review
 fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges
 for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate
 or cost charged by the professional consultant for comparable services to the municipality
 for services which are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants. Fees charged
 to the municipality relating to any appeal of a decision on an application shall not
 be considered review fees and may not be charged to an applicant.
 (i) The governing body shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill showing work performed,
 identifying the person performing the services and the time and date spent for each
 task. Nothing in this subparagraph shall prohibit interim itemized billing or municipal
 escrow or other security requirements. In the event the applicant disputes the amount
 of any such review fees, the applicant shall, no later than 100 days after the date
 of transmittal of the bill to the applicant, notify the municipality and the municipality's
 professional consultant that such fees are disputed and shall explain the basis of
 their objections to the fees charged, in which case the municipality shall not delay
 or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the applicant's
 dispute over fees. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within 100 days shall
 be a waiver of the applicant's right to arbitration of that bill under section 510(g).
 (ii) In the event that the municipality's professional consultant and the applicant cannot
 agree on the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant
 and the municipality shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in
 section 510(g), provided that the arbitrator resolving such dispute shall be of the
 same profession or discipline as the professional consultant whose fees are being
 disputed.
 (iii) Subsequent to a decision on an application, the governing body shall submit to the
 applicant an itemized bill for review fees, specifically designated as a final bill.
 The final bill shall include all review fees incurred at least through the date of
 the decision on the application. If for any reason additional review is required subsequent
 to the decision, including inspections and other work to satisfy the conditions of
 the approval, the review fees shall be charged to the applicant as a supplement to
 the final bill.
 ((1) amended Oct. 24, 2012, P.L.1258, No.154)
 (1.1) Provisions for the exclusion of certain land development from the definition of land
 development contained in section 107 only when such land development involves:
 (i) the conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single family semi-detached
 dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such units are intended
 to be a condominium;
 (ii) the addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot or lots
 subordinate to an existing principal building; or
 (iii) the addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an enterprise
 which would be considered an amusement park. For purposes of this subclause, an amusement
 park is defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
 structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
 amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by proper
 authorities.
 (2) Provisions for insuring that:
 (i) the layout or arrangement of the subdivision or land development shall conform to
 the comprehensive plan and to any regulations or maps adopted in furtherance thereof;
 (ii) streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be coordinated, and
 be of such widths and grades and in such locations as deemed necessary to accommodate
 prospective traffic, and facilitate fire protection;
 (iii) adequate easements or rights-of-way shall be provided for drainage and utilities;
 (iv) reservations if any by the developer of any area designed for use as public grounds
 shall be suitable size and location for their designated uses; and
 (v) land which is subject to flooding, subsidence or underground fires either shall be
 made safe for the purpose for which such land is proposed to be used, or that such
 land shall be set aside for uses which shall not endanger life or property or further
 aggravate or increase the existing menace.
 (3) Provisions governing the standards by which streets shall be designed, graded and
 improved, and walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, water and sewage
 facilities and other improvements shall be installed as a condition precedent to final
 approval of plats in accordance with the requirements of section 509. The standards
 shall insure that the streets be improved to such a condition that the streets are
 passable for vehicles which are intended to use that street: Provided, however, That
 no municipality shall be required to accept such streets for public dedication until
 the streets meet such additional standards and specifications as the municipality
 may require for public dedication.
 (4) Provisions which take into account phased land development not intended for the immediate
 erection of buildings where streets, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants,
 water and sewage facilities and other improvements may not be possible to install
 as a condition precedent to final approval of plats, but will be a condition precedent
 to the erection of buildings on lands included in the approved plat.
 (4.1) Provisions which apply uniformly throughout the municipality regulating minimum setback
 lines and minimum lot sizes which are based upon the availability of water and sewage,
 in the event the municipality has not enacted a zoning ordinance.
 (5) Provisions for encouraging and promoting flexibility, economy and ingenuity in the
 layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, including provisions authorizing
 alterations in site requirements and for encouraging other practices which are in
 accordance with modern and evolving principles of site planning and development.
 (6) Provisions for encouraging the use of renewable energy systems and energy-conserving
 building design.
 (7) Provisions for soliciting reviews and reports from adjacent municipalities and other
 governmental agencies affected by the plans.
 (8) Provisions for administering waivers or modifications to the minimum standards of
 the ordinance in accordance with section 512.1, when the literal compliance with mandatory
 provisions is shown to the satisfaction of the governing body or planning agency,
 where applicable, to be unreasonable, to cause undue hardship, or when an alternative
 standard can be demonstrated to provide equal or better results.
 (9) Provisions for the approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, subject to conditions
 acceptable to the applicant and a procedure for the applicant's acceptance or rejection
 of any conditions which may be imposed, including a provision that approval of a plat
 shall be rescinded automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept or reject
 such conditions within such time limit as may be established by the governing ordinance.
 (10) Provisions and standards for insuring that new developments incorporate adequate provisions
 for a reliable, safe and adequate water supply to support intended uses within the
 capacity of available resources.
 (11) Provisions requiring the public dedication of land suitable for the use intended;
 and, upon agreement with the applicant or developer, the construction of recreational
 facilities, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, the private reservation of the land,
 or a combination, for park or recreation purposes as a condition precedent to final
 plan approval, provided that:
 (i) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any plan application, whether
 preliminary or final, pending at the time of enactment of such provisions.
 (ii) The ordinance includes definite standards for determining the proportion of a development
 to be dedicated and the amount of any fee to be paid in lieu thereof.
 (iii) The land or fees, or combination thereof, are to be used only for the purpose of providing,
 acquiring, operating or maintaining park or recreational facilities reasonably accessible
 to the development.
 (iv) The governing body has a formally adopted recreation plan, and the park and recreational
 facilities are in accordance with definite principles and standards contained in the
 subdivision and land development ordinance.
 (v) The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid shall bear
 a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by future
 inhabitants of the development or subdivision.
 (vi) A fee authorized under this subsection shall, upon its receipt by a municipality,
 be deposited in an interest-bearing account, clearly identified as reserved for providing,
 acquiring, operating or maintaining park or recreational facilities. Interest earned
 on such accounts shall become funds of that account.
 (vii) Upon request of any person who paid any fee under this subsection, the municipality
 shall refund such fee, plus interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment,
 if the municipality had used the fee paid for a purpose other than the purposes set
 forth in this section.
 (viii) No municipality shall have the power to require the construction of recreational facilities
 or the dedication of land, or fees in lieu thereof, or private reservation except
 as may be provided by statute.
 ((11) amended Sept. 24, 2014, P.L.2474, No.135)
 19680247u503.1s
 Section 503.1. Water Supply.--Every ordinance adopted pursuant to this article shall include a provision
 that, if water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned and maintained
 by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or development, applicants
 shall present evidence to the governing body or planning agency, as the case may be,
 that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility,
 a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation,
 authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania
 Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement
 or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
 shall be acceptable evidence.
 19680247u504s
 Section 504. Enactment of Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.--(a) Before voting on the enactment of a proposed subdivision and land development ordinance,
 the governing body shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice.
 A brief summary setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed ordinance and
 a reference to the place within the municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance
 may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice. Unless the
 proposed subdivision and land development ordinance shall have been prepared by the
 planning agency, the governing body shall submit the ordinance to the planning agency
 at least 45 days prior to the hearing on such ordinance to provide the planning agency
 an opportunity to submit recommendations. If a county planning agency shall have been
 created for the county in which the municipality adopting the ordinance is located,
 then, at least 45 days prior to the public hearing on the ordinance, the municipality
 shall submit the proposed ordinance to said county planning agency for recommendations.
 (b) Within 30 days after adoption, the governing body of a municipality, other than a
 county, shall forward a certified copy of the subdivision and land development ordinance
 to the county planning agency or, in counties where no planning agency exists, to
 the governing body of the county in which the municipality is located.
 19680247u505s
 Section 505. Enactment of Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance Amendment.--(a) Amendments to the subdivision and land development ordinance shall become effective
 only after a public hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed
 for enactment of a proposed ordinance by this article. In addition, in case of an
 amendment other than that prepared by the planning agency, the governing body shall
 submit each such amendment to the planning agency for recommendations at least 30
 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment. If
 a county planning agency shall have been created for the county in which the municipality
 proposing the amendment is located, then, at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
 the amendment, the municipality shall submit the proposed amendment to said county
 planning agency for recommendations.
 (b) Within 30 days after adoption, the governing body of a municipality, other than a
 county, shall forward a certified copy of any amendment to the subdivision and land
 development ordinance to the county planning agency or, in counties where no planning
 agency exists, to the governing body of the county in which the municipality is located.
 19680247u506s
 Section 506. Publication, Advertisement and Availability of Ordinance.--(a) Proposed subdivision and land development ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
 unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section,
 and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered,
 a reference to a place within the municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance
 or amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than
 the cost thereof. The governing body shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment
 once in one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality not more than 60
 days nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance
 or amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
 prepared by the municipal solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
 detail. If the full text is not included:
 (1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
 at the time the public notice is published.
 (2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law library
 or other county office designated by the county commissioners, who may impose a fee
 no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
 (b) In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed ordinance or amendment,
 before voting upon enactment, the governing body shall, at least ten days prior to
 enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality,
 a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with
 a summary of the amendments.
 (c) Subdivision and land development ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into
 official ordinance books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded
 therein.
 19680247u507s
 Section 507. Effect of Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.--Where a subdivision and land
 development ordinance has been enacted by a municipality under the authority of this
 article no subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall
 be made, no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other improvements
 in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
 use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except
 in accordance with the provisions of such ordinance.
 19680247u508s
 Section 508. Approval of Plats.--All applications for approval of a plat (other than those governed
 by Article VII), whether preliminary or final, shall be acted upon by the governing
 body or the planning agency within such time limits as may be fixed in the subdivision
 and land development ordinance but the governing body or the planning agency shall
 render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following
 the date of the regular meeting of the governing body or the planning agency (whichever
 first reviews the application) next following the date the application is filed or
 after a final order of court remanding an application, provided that should the said
 next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application
 or the final order of the court, the said 90-day period shall be measured from the
 30th day following the day the application has been filed. (Intro.par. amended June
 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (1) The decision of the governing body or the planning agency shall be in writing and
 shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last known
 address not later than 15 days following the decision.
 (2) When the application is not approved in terms as filed the decision shall specify
 the defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not
 been met and shall, in each case, cite to the provisions of the statute or ordinance
 relied upon.
 (3) Failure of the governing body or agency to render a decision and communicate it to
 the applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an
 approval of the application in terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed
 in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation
 of communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time
 or change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.
 (4) Changes in the ordinance shall affect plats as follows:
 (i) From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
 is duly filed as provided in the subdivision and land development ordinance, and while
 such application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the
 zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall affect the decision
 on such application adversely to the applicant and the applicant shall be entitled
 to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans
 as they stood at the time the application was duly filed. In addition, when a preliminary
 application has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval
 in accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary application as hereinafter
 provided. However, if an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent
 application shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
 (ii) When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final, has been
 approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions,
 no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance
 or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence
 and to complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
 of such approval within five years from such approval. The five-year period shall
 be extended for the duration of any litigation, including appeals, which prevent the
 commencement or completion of the development and for the duration of any sewer or
 utility moratorium or prohibition which was imposed subsequent to the filing of an
 application for preliminary approval of a plat. In the event of an appeal filed by
 any party from the approval or disapproval of a plat, the five-year period shall be
 extended by the total time from the date the appeal was filed until a final order
 in such matter has been entered and all appeals have been concluded and any period
 for filing appeals or requests for reconsideration have expired, provided, however,
 no extension shall be based upon any water or sewer moratorium which was in effect
 as of the date of the filing of a preliminary application. ((ii) amended June 22,
 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (iii) Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid five-year
 period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In the case of
 any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed
 in the light of the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
 at the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
 (iv) Where the landowner has substantially completed the required improvements as depicted
 upon the final plat within the aforesaid five-year limit, or any extension thereof
 as may be granted by the governing body, no change of municipal ordinance or plan
 enacted subsequent to the date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke
 any aspect of the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or density,
 lot, building, street or utility location.
 (v) In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of improvements beyond
 the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by the landowner with the preliminary
 plat delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines within which applications
 for final plat approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall
 be updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the preliminary
 plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section has been granted and
 any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to approval of the governing
 body in its discretion.
 (vi) Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except for the last
 section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as depicted
 on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the governing body
 in its discretion. Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated
 any of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance with
 landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the various sections,
 then the aforesaid protections afforded by substantially completing the improvements
 depicted upon the final plat within five years shall apply and for any section or
 sections, beyond the initial section, in which the required improvements have not
 been substantially completed within said five-year period the aforesaid protections
 shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years from the date of final
 plat approval for each section.
 (vii) Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats
 for the various sections shall subject any such section to any and all changes in
 zoning, subdivision and other governing ordinance enacted by the municipality subsequent
 to the date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
 (5) Before acting on any subdivision plat, the governing body or the planning agency,
 as the case may be, may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
 (6) No plat which will require access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Department
 of Transportation shall be finally approved unless the plat contains a notice that
 a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to section 420 of the act of June
 1, 1945 (P.L.1242, No.428), known as the "State Highway Law," before driveway access
 to a State highway is permitted. The department shall, within sixty days of the date
 of receipt of an application for a highway occupancy permit, (i) approve the permit,
 which shall be valid thereafter unless, prior to commencement of construction thereunder,
 the geographic, physical or other conditions under which the permit is approved change,
 requiring modification or denial of the permit, in which event the department shall
 give notice thereof in accordance with regulations, (ii) deny the permit, (iii) return
 the application for additional information or correction to conform with department
 regulations or (iv) determine that no permit is required in which case the department
 shall notify the municipality and the applicant in writing. If the department shall
 fail to take any action within the 60-day period, the permit will be deemed to be
 issued. The plat shall be marked to indicate that access to the State highway shall
 be only as authorized by a highway occupancy permit. Neither the department nor any
 municipality to which permit-issuing authority has been delegated under section 420
 of the "State Highway Law" shall be liable in damages for any injury to persons or
 property arising out of the issuance or denial of a driveway permit, or for failure
 to regulate any driveway. Furthermore, the municipality from which the building permit
 approval has been requested shall not be held liable for damages to persons or property
 arising out of the issuance or denial of a driveway permit by the department.
 (7) The municipality may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings
 authorized by this section. In exercising such an option, the municipality and mediating
 parties shall meet the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Article
 IX.
 19680247u508.1s
 Section 508.1. Notice to School District.--Each month a municipality shall notify in writing the
 superintendent of a school district in which a plan for a residential development
 was finally approved by the municipality during the preceding month. The notice shall
 include, but not be limited to, the location of the development, the number and types
 of units to be included in the development and the expected construction schedule
 of the development.
 (508.1 added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u509s
 Section 509. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof Prerequisite to Final Plat Approval.--(a)
 No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat have been
 improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved as
 may be required by the subdivision and land development ordinance and any walkways,
 curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers,
 storm sewers and other improvements as may be required by the subdivision and land
 development ordinance have been installed in accordance with such ordinance. In lieu
 of the completion of any improvements required as a condition for the final approval
 of a plat, including improvements or fees required pursuant to section 509(i), the
 subdivision and land development ordinance shall provide for the deposit with the
 municipality of financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of such
 improvements or common amenities including, but not limited to, roads, storm water
 detention and/or retention basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational
 facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
 The applicant shall not be required to provide financial security for the costs of
 any improvements for which financial security is required by and provided to the Department
 of Transportation in connection with the issuance of a highway occupancy permit pursuant
 to section 420 of the act of June 1, 1945 (P.L.1242, No.428), known as the "State
 Highway Law." ((a) amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (b) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the governing body
 or the planning agency, if designated, shall furnish the developer with a signed copy
 of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the developer
 obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or record plan shall not
 be signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The
 resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked
 if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a written
 extension is granted by the governing body; such extension shall not be unreasonably
 withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
 (c) Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the municipality
 may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, Federal or Commonwealth
 chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow
 accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security
 for the purposes of this section.
 (d) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or Federal or Commonwealth
 chartered lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security,
 provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such
 business within the Commonwealth.
 (e) Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion
 of any improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed in the formal
 action of approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
 (f) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required improvements
 shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following
 the date scheduled for completion by the developer. Annually, the municipality may
 adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
 which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining
 improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
 for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment,
 the municipality may require the developer to post additional security in order to
 assure that the financial security equals but does not exceed said 110%. Any additional
 security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection. ((f)
 amended Dec. 22, 2021, P.L.469, No.97)
 (g) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an estimate of the cost
 of completion of the required improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer
 and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and
 certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
 municipality, upon the recommendation of the municipal engineer, may refuse to accept
 such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the municipality
 are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
 recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth
 and chosen mutually by the municipality and the applicant or developer. The estimate
 certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be
 the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the
 services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the municipality and the applicant
 or developer.
 (h) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year from the date
 of posting of the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount
 of financial security may be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period
 beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security to an amount
 not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished
 on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above bidding
 procedure. ((h) amended Dec. 22, 2021, P.L.469, No.97)
 (i) In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the governing body
 or the planning agency may authorize submission of final plats by section or stages
 of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future
 sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any
 finally approved section of the development.
 (j) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the
 financial security may request the governing body to release or authorize the release,
 from time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
 the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
 addressed to the governing body, and the governing body shall have 45 days from receipt
 of such request within which to allow the municipal engineer to certify, in writing,
 to the governing body that such portion of the work upon the improvements has been
 completed in accordance with the approved plat. Upon such certification the governing
 body shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount
 as estimated by the municipal engineer fairly representing the value of the improvements
 completed or, if the governing body fails to act within said 45-day period, the governing
 body shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The governing
 body may, prior to release at the time of completion and certification by its engineer,
 retain 10% of the estimated cost of the remaining improvements. ((j) amended Dec.
 22, 2021, P.L.469, No.97)
 (k) Where the governing body accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements
 following completion, the governing body may require the posting of financial security
 to secure structural integrity of said dedicated improvements as well as the functioning
 of said dedicated improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
 depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance
 of dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required
 in this section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of
 the financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of
 said dedicated improvements. ((k) amended Oct. 24, 2012, P.L.1258, No.154)
 (l) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or facilities
 related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules
 and regulations of a public utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from
 the municipality, financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof
 shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility
 or municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial security as
 otherwise required by this section.
 (m) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of improvements
 required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as set forth in this section,
 the municipality shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or other permits
 relating to the erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon the
 lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
 depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial security has been
 provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected shall not
 be withheld following: the improvement of the streets providing access to and from
 existing public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
 passable condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted
 upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question
 if such improvements are necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building
 or buildings. Any ordinance or statute inconsistent herewith is hereby expressly repealed.
 19680247u510s
 Section 510. Release from Improvement Bond.--(a) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements,
 the developer shall notify the municipal governing body, in writing, by certified
 or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send
 a copy thereof to the municipal engineer. The municipal governing body shall, within
 ten days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the municipal engineer
 to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The municipal engineer shall, thereupon,
 file a report, in writing, with the municipal governing body, and shall promptly mail
 a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall
 be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the municipal engineer of the aforesaid
 authorization from the governing body; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
 approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
 improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by
 the municipal engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for such
 nonapproval or rejection.
 (b) The municipal governing body shall notify the developer, within 15 days of receipt
 of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered mail of the action
 of said municipal governing body with relation thereto.
 (c) If the municipal governing body or the municipal engineer fails to comply with the
 time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have
 been approved and the developer shall be released from all liability, pursuant to
 its performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
 (d) If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected
 by the municipal governing body, the developer shall proceed to complete the same
 and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall
 be followed.
 (e) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right
 to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the
 municipal governing body or the municipal engineer.
 (f) Where herein reference is made to the municipal engineer, he shall be a duly registered
 professional engineer employed by the municipality or engaged as a consultant thereto.
 (g) The municipality may prescribe that the applicant shall reimburse the municipality
 for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred in connection with the inspection
 of improvements. The applicant shall not be required to reimburse the governing body
 for any inspection which is duplicative of inspections conducted by other governmental
 agencies or public utilities. The burden of proving that any inspection is duplicative
 shall be upon the objecting applicant. Such reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule
 established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance
 with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the municipality's professional consultant
 for work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall the
 fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional consultant to the municipality
 for comparable services when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
 (1) The governing body shall submit to the applicant an itemized bill showing the work
 performed in connection with the inspection of improvements performed, identifying
 the person performing the services and the time and date spent for each task. In the
 event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection with the
 inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, no later than 100 days after the
 date of transmittal of a bill for inspection services, notify the municipality and
 the municipality's professional consultant that such inspection expenses are disputed
 as unreasonable or unnecessary and shall explain the basis of their objections to
 the fees charged, in which case the municipality shall not delay or disapprove a request
 for release of financial security, a subdivision or land development application or
 any approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's dispute of inspection
 expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within 100 days shall be a waiver
 of the applicant's right to arbitration of that bill under this section.
 (1.1) Subsequent to the final release of financial security for completion of improvements
 for a subdivision or land development or any phase thereof, the professional consultant
 shall submit to the governing body a bill for inspection services, specifically designated
 as a final bill, which the governing body shall submit to the applicant. The final
 bill shall include inspection fees incurred through the release of financial security.
 (2) If the professional consultant and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses
 which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant shall have the right, within
 100 days of the transmittal of the final bill or supplement to the final bill to the
 applicant, to request the appointment of another professional consultant to serve
 as an arbitrator. The applicant and professional consultant whose fees are being challenged
 shall, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional consultant to review any
 bills the applicant has disputed and which remain unresolved and make a determination
 as to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary. The arbitrator shall be
 of the same profession as the professional consultant whose fees are being challenged.
 (3) The arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review such documentation
 as the arbitrator in his or her sole opinion deems necessary and shall render a decision
 no later than 50 days after the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the
 arbitrator, the applicant or the professional consultant whose fees were challenged
 shall be required to pay any amounts necessary to implement the decision within 60
 days. In the event the municipality has paid the professional consultant an amount
 in excess of the amount determined to be reasonable and necessary, the professional
 consultant shall within 60 days reimburse the excess payment.
 (4) In the event that the municipality's professional consultant and applicant cannot
 agree upon the arbitrator to be appointed within 20 days of the request for appointment
 of an arbitrator, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of the
 Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the municipality is located
 (or if at the time there be no President Judge, then the senior active judge then
 sitting) shall appoint such arbitrator, who, in that case, shall be neither the municipality's
 professional consultant nor any professional consultant who has been retained by,
 or performed services for, the municipality or the applicant within the preceding
 five years.
 (5) The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the applicant if the disputed fee is upheld
 by the arbitrator. The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the charging party if
 the disputed fee is $2,500 or greater than the payment decided by the arbitrator.
 The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid in an equal amount by the applicant and the
 charging party if the disputed fee is less than $2,500 of the payment decided by the
 arbitrator.
 (6) In the event that the disputed fees have been paid and the arbitrator finds that the
 disputed fees are unreasonable or excessive by more than $10,000, the arbitrator shall:
 (i) award the amount of the fees found to be unreasonable or excessive to the party that
 paid the disputed fee; and
 (ii) impose a surcharge of 4% of the amount found as unreasonable or excessive to be paid
 to the party that paid the disputed fee.
 (7) A municipality or an applicant shall have 100 days after paying a fee to dispute any
 fee charged as being unreasonable or excessive.
 ((g) amended Oct. 24, 2012, P.L.1258, No.154)
 19680247u511s
 Section 511. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements.--In the event that any improvements
 which may be required have not been installed as provided in the subdivision and land
 development ordinance or in accord with the approved final plat the governing body
 of the municipality is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond, or
 other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond,
 or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs
 or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the governing body
 of the municipality may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or
 part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or
 equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
 improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
 legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely
 for the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not for any
 other municipal purpose.
 19680247u512.1s
 Section 512.1. Modifications.--(a) The governing body or the planning agency, if authorized to approve applications within
 the subdivision and land development ordinance, may grant a modification of the requirements
 of one or more provisions if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because
 of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification
 will not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the
 ordinance is observed.
 (b) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany and be a part
 of the application for development. The request shall state in full the grounds and
 facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the provision
 or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum modification necessary.
 (c) If approval power is reserved by the governing body, the request for modification
 may be referred to the planning agency for advisory comments.
 (d) The governing body or the planning agency, as the case may be, shall keep a written
 record of all action on all requests for modifications.
 19680247u513s
 Section 513. Recording Plats and Deeds.--(a) Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall within 90 days of such final
 approval or 90 days after the date of delivery of an approved plat signed by the governing
 body following completion of conditions imposed for such approval, whichever is later,
 record such plat in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which the
 municipality is located. Whenever such plat approval is required by a municipality,
 the recorder of deeds of the county shall not accept any plat for recording, unless
 such plat officially notes the approval of the governing body and review by the county
 planning agency, if one exists.
 (b) The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment increases until
 such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed on the land included within
 the subject plat.
 (513 amended Dec. 20, 2000, P.L.940, No.127)
 19680247u514s
 Section 514. Effect of Plat Approval on Official Map.--After a plat has been approved and recorded
 as provided in this article, all streets and public grounds on such plat shall be,
 and become a part of the official map of the municipality without public hearing.
 19680247u515s
 Section 515. Penalties.--(515 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u515.1s
 Section 515.1. Preventive Remedies.--(a) In addition to other remedies, the municipality may institute and maintain appropriate
 actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful
 construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
 or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
 other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
 seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
 (b) A municipality may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further
 improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted
 from a subdivision of real property in violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant
 to this article. This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any
 of the following applicants:
 (1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
 (2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without
 regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of
 the violation.
 (3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
 without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive knowledge
 of the violation.
 (4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
 to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
 or constructive knowledge of the violation.
 As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval
 to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such
 real property, the municipality may require compliance with the conditions that would
 have been applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest
 in such real property.
 19680247u515.2s
 Section 515.2. Jurisdiction.--District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
 under section 515.3.
 19680247u515.2v
 Compiler's Note: Section 28 of Act 207 of 2004 provided that any and all references in any other law
 to a "district justice" or "justice of the peace" shall be deemed to be references
 to a magisterial district judge.
 19680247u515.3s
 Section 515.3. Enforcement Remedies.--(a) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of
 any subdivision or land development ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling
 laws shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
 by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
 reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. No judgment
 shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination
 of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
 the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
 rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
 violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation
 further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
 corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation,
 in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
 fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice
 and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
 (b) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
 tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
 (c) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
 person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for
 enforcement pursuant to this section.
 19680247u515.3v
 Compiler's Note: Section 28 of Act 207 of 2004 provided that any and all references in any other law
 to a "district justice" or "justice of the peace" shall be deemed to be references
 to a magisterial district judge.
 19680247u501-Ah
 ARTICLE V-A
 Municipal Capital Improvement
 (Art. added Dec. 19, 1990, P.L.1343, No.209)
 Compiler's Note: Section 301(a)(9) of Act 58 of 1996, which created the Department of Community and
 Economic Development and abolished the Department of Community Affairs, provided that
 housing, community assistance and other functions under Article V-A are transferred
 from the Department of Community Affairs to the Department of Community and Economic
 Development.
 19680247u501-As
 Section 501-A. Purposes.--To further the purposes of this act in an era of increasing development
 and of a corresponding demand for municipal capital improvements, to insure that the
 cost of needed capital improvements be applied to new developments in a manner that
 will allocate equitably the cost of those improvements among property owners and to
 respond to the increasing difficulty which municipalities are experiencing in developing
 revenue sources to fund new capital infrastructure from the public sector, the following
 powers are granted to all municipalities, other than counties, which municipalities
 have adopted either a municipal or county comprehensive plan, subdivision and land
 development ordinance and zoning ordinance.
 (501-A added Dec. 19, 1990, P.L.1343, No.209)
 19680247u502-As
 Section 502-A. Definitions.--The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have
 the meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
 "Adjusted for family size," adjusted in a manner which results in an income eligibility
 level which is lower for households with fewer than four people, or higher for households
 with more than four people, than the base income eligibility level determined as provided
 in the definition of low- to moderate-income persons based upon a formula as established
 by the rule of the agency.
 "Adjusted gross income," all wages, assets, regular cash or noncash contributions
 or gifts from persons outside the household, and such other resources and benefits
 as may be determined to be income by rule of the department, adjusted for family size,
 less deductions under section 62 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (Public Law
 99-514, 26 U.S.C. § 62 et seq.).
 "Affordable," with respect to the housing unit to be occupied by low- to moderate-income
 persons, monthly rents or monthly mortgage payments, including property taxes and
 insurance, that do not exceed 30% of that amount which represents 100% of the adjusted
 gross annual income for households within the metropolitan statistical area (MSA)
 or, if not within the MSA, within the county in which the housing unit is located,
 divided by 12.
 "Agency," the Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency as created pursuant to the act of
 December 3, 1959 (P.L.1688, No.621), known as the "Housing Finance Agency Law."
 "Department," the Department of Community Affairs of the Commonwealth.
 "Existing deficiencies," existing highways, roads or streets operating at a level
 of service below the preferred level of service designated by the municipality, as
 adopted in the transportation capital improvement plan.
 "Highways, roads or streets," any highways, roads or streets identified on the legally
 adopted municipal street or highway plan or the official map which carry vehicular
 traffic, together with all necessary appurtenances, including bridges, rights-of-way
 and traffic control improvements. The term shall not include the interstate highway
 system.
 "Impact fee," a charge or fee imposed by a municipality against new development in
 order to generate revenue for funding the costs of transportation capital improvements
 necessitated by and attributable to new development.
 "Low- to moderate-income persons," one or more natural persons or a family, the total
 annual adjusted gross household income of which is less than 100% of the median annual
 adjusted gross income for households in this Commonwealth or is less than 100% of
 the median annual adjusted gross income for households within the metropolitan statistical
 area (MSA) or, if not within the MSA, within the county in which the household is
 located, whichever is greater.
 "New development," any commercial, industrial or residential or other project which
 involves new construction, enlargement, reconstruction, redevelopment, relocation
 or structural alteration and which is expected to generate additional vehicular traffic
 within the transportation service area of the municipality.
 "Offsite improvements," those public capital improvements which are not onsite improvements
 and that serve the needs of more than one development.
 "Onsite improvements," all improvements constructed on the applicant's property, or
 the improvements constructed on the property abutting the applicant's property necessary
 for the ingress or egress to the applicant's property, and required to be constructed
 by the applicant pursuant to any municipal ordinance, including, but not limited to,
 the municipal building code, subdivision and land development ordinance, PRD regulations
 and zoning ordinance.
 "Pass-through trip," a trip which has both an origin and a destination outside the
 service area.
 "Road improvement," the construction, enlargement, expansion or improvement of public
 highways, roads or streets. It shall not include bicycle lanes, bus lanes, busways,
 pedestrian ways, rail lines or tollways.
 "Traffic or transportation engineer or planner," any person who is a registered professional
 engineer in this Commonwealth or is otherwise qualified by education and experience
 to perform traffic or transportation planning analyses of the type required in this
 act and who deals with the planning, geometric design and traffic operations of highways,
 roads and streets, their networks, terminals and abutting lands and relationships
 with other modes of transportation for the achievement of convenient, efficient and
 safe movement of goods and persons.
 "Transportation capital improvements," those offsite road improvements that have a
 life expectancy of three or more years, not including costs for maintenance, operation
 or repair.
 "Transportation service area," a geographically defined portion of the municipality
 not to exceed seven square miles of area which, pursuant to the comprehensive plan
 and applicable district zoning regulations, has an aggregation of sites with development
 potential creating the need for transportation improvements within such area to be
 funded by impact fees. No area may be included in more than one transportation service
 area.
 (502-A added Dec. 19, 1990, P.L.1343, No.209)
 19680247u503-As
 Section 503-A. Grant of Power.--(a) The governing body of each municipality other than a county, in accordance with the
 conditions and procedures set forth in this act, may enact, amend and repeal impact
 fee ordinances and, thereafter, may establish, at the time of municipal approval of
 any new development or subdivision, the amount of an impact fee for any of the offsite
 public transportation capital improvements authorized by this act as a condition precedent
 to final plat approval under the municipality's subdivision and land development ordinance.
 Every ordinance adopted pursuant to this act shall include, but not be limited to,
 provisions for the following:
 (1) The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition of impact fees consistent
 with the provisions of this act.
 (2) The agency, body or office within the municipality which shall administer the collection,
 disbursement and accounting of impact fees.
 (3) The time, method and procedure for the payment of impact fees.
 (4) The procedure for issuance of any credit against or reimbursement of impact fees which
 an applicant may be entitled to receive consistent with the provisions of this act.
 (5) Exemptions or credits which the municipality may choose to adopt. In this regard the
 municipality shall have the power to:
 (i) Provide a credit of up to 100% of the applicable impact fees for all new development
 and growth which constitutes affordable housing to low- and moderate-income persons.
 (ii) Provide a credit of up to 100% of the applicable impact fees for growth which are
 determined by the municipality to serve an overriding public interest.
 (iii) Exempt de minimus applications from impact fee requirements. If such a policy is adopted,
 the definition of de minimus shall be contained in the ordinance.
 (b) No municipality shall have the power to require as a condition for approval of a land
 development or subdivision application the construction, dedication or payment of
 any offsite improvements or capital expenditures of any nature whatsoever or impose
 any contribution in lieu thereof, exaction fee, or any connection, tapping or similar
 fee except as may be specifically authorized under this act.
 (c) No municipality may levy an impact fee prior to the enactment of a municipal impact
 fee ordinance adopted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this act, except
 as may be specifically authorized by the provisions of this act. A transportation
 impact fee shall be imposed by a municipality within a service area or areas only
 where such fees have been determined and imposed pursuant to the standards, provisions
 and procedures set forth herein.
 (d) Impact fees may be used for those costs incurred for improvements designated in the
 transportation capital improvement program which are attributable to new development,
 including the acquisition of land and rights-of-way; engineering, legal and planning
 costs; and all other costs which are directly related to road improvements within
 the service area or areas, including debt service. Impact fees shall not be imposed
 or used for costs associated with any of the following:
 (1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of municipal facilities other than capital
 improvements identified in the transportation capital improvements plan required by
 this act.
 (2) Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements.
 (3) Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve
 existing developments in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental
 or regulatory standards not attributable to new development.
 (4) Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to remedy
 deficiencies in service to existing development or fund deficiencies in existing municipal
 capital improvements resulting from a lack of adequate municipal funding over the
 years for maintenance or capital construction costs.
 (5) Preparing and developing the land use assumptions, roadway sufficiency analysis and
 transportation capital improvement plan, except that impact fees may be used for no
 more than a proportionate amount of the cost of professional consultants incurred
 in preparing a roadway sufficiency analysis of infrastructure within a specified transportation
 service area, such allowable proportion to be calculated by dividing the total costs
 of all road improvements in the adopted transportation capital improvement program
 within the transportation service area attributable to projected future development
 within the service area, as defined in section 504-A(e)(1)(iii), by the total costs
 of all road improvements in the adopted transportation capital improvement program
 within the specific transportation service area, as defined in section 504-A.
 (e) Nothing in this act shall be deemed to alter or affect a municipality's existing power
 to require an applicant for municipal approval of any new development or subdivision
 from paying for the installation of onsite improvements as provided for in a municipality's
 subdivision and land development ordinance as authorized by this act.
 (f) No municipality may delay or deny any application for building permit, certificate-of-occupancy,
 development or any other approval or permit required for construction, land development,
 subdivision or occupancy for the reason that any project of an approved capital improvement
 program has not been completed.
 (g) A municipality which has enacted an impact fee ordinance on or before June 1, 1990,
 may for a period not to exceed one year from the effective date of this article, adopt
 an impact fee ordinance to conform with the standards and procedures set forth in
 this article. Where a fee previously imposed pursuant to an ordinance in effect on
 June 1, 1990, for transportation improvements authorized by this article is greater
 than the recalculated fee due under the newly adopted ordinance, the individual who
 paid the fee is entitled to a refund of the difference. If the recalculated fee is
 greater than the previously paid fee, there shall be no additional charge.
 (h) The powers provided by this section may be exercised by two or more municipalities,
 other than counties, which have adopted a joint municipal comprehensive plan pursuant
 to Article XI through a joint municipal authority, subject to the conditions and procedures
 set forth in this article. ((h) added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (503-A added Dec. 19, 1990, P.L.1343, No.209)
 19680247u504-As
 Section 504-A. Transportation Capital Improvements Plan.--(a) A transportation capital improvements plan shall be prepared and adopted by the governing
 body of the municipality prior to the enactment of any impact fee ordinance. The municipality
 shall provide qualified professionals to assist the transportation impact fee advisory
 committee or the planning commission in the preparation of the transportation capital
 improvements plan and calculation of the impact fees to be imposed to implement the
 plan in accordance with the procedures, provisions and standards set forth in this
 act.
 (b) (1) An impact fee advisory committee shall be created by resolution of a municipality
 intending to adopt a transportation impact fee ordinance. The resolution shall describe
 the geographical area or areas of the municipality for which the advisory committee
 shall develop the land use assumptions and conduct the roadway sufficiency analysis
 studies.
 (2) The advisory committee shall consist of no fewer than 7 nor more than 15 members,
 all of whom shall serve without compensation. The governing body of the municipality
 shall appoint as members of the advisory committee persons who are either residents
 of the municipality or conduct business within the municipality and are not employees
 or officials of the municipality. Not less than 40% of the members of the advisory
 committee shall be representatives of the real estate, commercial and residential
 development, and building industries. The municipality may also appoint traffic or
 transportation engineers or planners to serve on the advisory committee provided the
 appointment is made after consultation with the advisory committee members. The traffic
 or transportation engineers or planners appointed to the advisory committee may not
 be employed by the municipality for the development of or consultation on the roadways
 sufficiency analysis which may lead to the adoption of the transportation capital
 improvements plan.
 (3) The governing body of the municipality may elect to designate the municipal planning
 commission appointed pursuant to Article II as the impact fee advisory committee.
 If the existing planning commission does not include members representative of the
 real estate, commercial and residential development, and building industries at no
 less than 40% of the membership, the governing body of the municipality shall appoint
 the sufficient number of representatives of the aforementioned industries who reside
 in the municipality or conduct business within the municipality to serve as ad hoc
 voting members of the planning commission whenever such commission functions as the
 impact fee advisory committee.
 (4) No impact fee ordinance may be invalidated as a result of any legal action challenging
 the composition of the advisory committee which is not brought within 90 days following
 the first public meeting of said advisory committee.
 (5) The advisory committee shall serve in an advisory capacity and shall have the following
 duties:
 (i) To make recommendations with respect to land use assumptions, the development of comprehensive
 road improvements and impact fees.
 (ii) To make recommendations to approve, disapprove or modify a capital improvement program
 by preparing a written report containing these recommendations to the municipality.
 (iii) To monitor and evaluate the implementation of a capital improvement program and the
 assessment of impact fees, and report annually to the municipality with respect to
 the same.
 (iv) To advise the municipality of the need to revise or update the land use assumptions,
 capital improvement program or impact fees.
 (c) (1) As a prerequisite to the development of the transportation capital improvements plan,
 the advisory committee shall develop land use assumptions for the determination of
 future growth and development within the designated area or areas as described by
 the municipal resolution and recommend its findings to the governing body. Prior to
 the issuance and presentation of a written report to the municipality on the recommendations
 for proposed land use assumptions upon which to base the development of the transportation
 capital improvements plan, the advisory committee shall conduct a public hearing,
 following the providing of proper notice in accordance with section 107, for the consideration
 of the land use assumption proposals. Following receipt of the advisory committee
 report, which shall include the findings of the public hearing, the governing body
 of the municipality shall by resolution approve, disapprove or modify the land use
 assumptions recommended by the advisory committee.
 (2) The land use assumptions report shall:
 (i) Describe the existing land uses within the designated area or areas and the highways,
 roads or streets incorporated therein.
 (ii) To the extent possible, reflect projected changes in land uses, densities of residential
 development, intensities of nonresidential development and population growth rates
 which may affect the level of traffic within the designated area or areas over a period
 of at least the next five years. These projections shall be based on an analysis of
 population growth rates during the prior five-year period, current zoning regulations,
 approved subdivision and land developments, and the future land use plan contained
 in the adopted municipal comprehensive plan. It may also refer to all professionally
 produced studies and reports pertaining to the municipality regarding such items as
 demographics, parks and recreation, economic development and any other study deemed
 appropriate by the municipality.
 (3) If the municipality is located in a county which has created a county planning agency,
 the advisory committee shall forward a copy of their proposed land use assumptions
 to the county planning agency for its comments at least 30 days prior to the public
 hearing. At the same time, the advisory committee shall also forward copies of the
 proposed assumptions to all contiguous municipalities and to the local school district
 for their review and comments.
 (d) (1) Upon adoption of the land use assumptions by the municipality, the advisory committee
 shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a roadway sufficiency analysis which shall
 establish the existing level of infrastructure sufficiency and preferred levels of
 service within any designated area or areas of the municipality as described by the
 resolution adopted pursuant to the creation of the advisory committee. The roadway
 sufficiency analysis shall be prepared for any highway, road or street within the
 designated area or areas on which the need for road improvements attributable to projected
 future new development is anticipated. The municipality shall commission a traffic
 or transportation engineer or planner to assist the advisory committee in the preparation
 of the roadway sufficiency analysis. Municipalities may jointly commission such engineer
 or planner to assist in the preparation of multiple municipality roadway sufficiency
 analyses. In preparing the roadway sufficiency analysis report, the engineer may consider
 and refer to previously produced professional studies and reports relevant to the
 production of the roadway sufficiency analysis as required by this section. It shall
 be deemed that the roads, streets and highways not on the roadway sufficiency analysis
 report are not impacted by future development. The roadway sufficiency analysis shall
 include the following components:
 (i) The establishment of existing volumes of traffic and existing levels of service.
 (ii) The identification of a preferred level of service established pursuant to the following:
 (A) The level of service shall be one of the categories of road service as defined by
 the Transportation Research Board of the National Academy of Sciences or the Institute
 of Transportation Engineers. The municipality may choose to select a level of service
 on a transportation service area basis as the preferred level of service. The preferred
 levels of service shall be designated by the governing body of the municipality following
 determination of the existing level of service as established by the roadway sufficiency
 analysis. If the preferred level of service is designated as greater than the existing
 level of service, the municipality shall be required to identify road improvements
 needed to correct the existing deficiencies.
 (B) Following adoption of the preferred level of service, such level of service may be
 waived for a particular road segment or intersection if the municipality finds that
 one or more of the following effectively precludes provision of road improvements
 necessary to meet the level of service: geometric design limitations, topographic
 limitations or the unavailability of necessary right-of-way.
 (iii) The identification of existing deficiencies which need to be remedied to accommodate
 existing traffic at the preferred level of service.
 (iv) The specification of the required road improvements needed to bring the existing level
 of service to the preferred level of service.
 (v) A projection of anticipated traffic volumes, with a separate determination of pass-through
 trips, for a period of not less than five years from the date of the preparation of
 the roadway sufficiency analysis based upon the land use assumptions adopted under
 this section.
 (vi) The identification of forecasted deficiencies which will be created by "pass-through"
 trips.
 (2) The advisory committee shall provide the governing body with the findings of the roadway
 sufficiency analysis. Following receipt of the advisory committee report, the governing
 body shall by resolution approve, disapprove or modify the roadway sufficiency analysis
 recommended by the advisory committee.
 (e) (1) Utilizing the information provided by the land use assumption and the roadway sufficiency
 analysis as the basis for determination of the need for road improvements to remedy
 existing deficiencies and accommodate future projected traffic volumes, the advisory
 committee shall identify those capital projects which the municipality should consider
 for adoption in its transportation capital improvements plan and shall recommend the
 delineation of the transportation service area or areas. The capital improvement plan
 shall be developed in accordance with generally accepted engineering and planning
 practices. The capital improvement program shall include projections of all designated
 road improvements in the capital improvement program. The total cost of the road improvements
 shall be based upon estimated costs, using standard traffic engineering standards,
 with a 10% maximum contingency which may be added to said estimate. These costs shall
 include improvements to correct existing deficiencies with identified anticipated
 sources of funding and timetables for implementation. The transportation capital improvements
 plan shall include the following components:
 (i) A description of the existing highways, roads and streets within the transportation
 service area and the road improvements required to update, improve, expand or replace
 such highways, roads and streets in order to meet the preferred level of service and
 usage and stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards not attributable
 to new development.
 (ii) A plan specifying the road improvements within the transportation service area attributable
 to forecasted pass-through traffic so as to maintain the preferred level of service
 after existing deficiencies identified by the roadway sufficiency analysis have been
 remedied.
 (iii) A plan specifying the road improvements or portions thereof within the transportation
 service area attributable to the projected future development, consistent with the
 adopted land use assumptions, in order to maintain the preferred level of service
 after accommodation for pass-through traffic and after existing deficiencies identified
 in the roadway sufficiency analysis have been remedied.
 (iv) The projected costs of the road improvements to be included in the transportation
 capital improvements plan, calculating separately for each project by the following
 categories:
 (A) The costs or portion thereof associated with correcting existing deficiencies as specified
 in subparagraph (i).
 (B) The costs or portions thereof attributable to providing road improvements to accommodate
 forecasted pass-through trips as specified in subparagraph (ii).
 (C) The costs of providing necessary road improvements or portions thereof attributable
 to projected future development as specified in subparagraph (iii), provided that
 no more than 50% of the cost of the improvements to any highway, road or street which
 qualifies as a State highway or portion of the rural State highway system as provided
 in section 102 of the act of June 1, 1945 (P.L.1242, No.428), known as the "State
 Highway Law," may be included.
 (v) A projected timetable and proposed budget for constructing each road improvement contained
 in the plan.
 (vi) The proposed source of funding for each capital improvement included in the road plan.
 This shall include anticipated revenue from the Federal Government, State government,
 municipality, impact fees and any other source. The estimated revenue for each capital
 improvement in the plan which is to be provided by impact fees shall be identified
 separately for each project.
 (2) The source of funding required for projects to remedy existing deficiencies as set
 forth in paragraph (1)(i) and the road improvements attributable to forecasted pass-through
 traffic as set forth in paragraph (1)(ii) shall be exclusive of funds generated from
 the assessment of impact fees.
 (3) Upon the completion of the transportation capital improvements plan and prior to its
 adoption by the governing body of the municipality and the enactment of a municipal
 impact fee ordinance, the advisory committee shall hold at least one public hearing
 for consideration of the plan. Notification of the public hearing shall comply with
 the requirement of section 107. The plan shall be available for public inspection
 at least ten working days prior to the date of the public hearing. After presentation
 of the recommendation by the advisory committee or its representatives at a public
 meeting of the governing body, the governing body may make such changes to the plan
 prior to its adoption as the governing body deems appropriate following review of
 the public comments made at the public hearing.
 (4) The governing body may periodically, but no more frequently than annually, request
 the impact fee advisory committee to review the capital improvements plan and impact
 fee charges and make recommendations for revisions for subsequent consideration and
 adoption by the governing body based only on the following:
 (i) New subsequent development which has occurred in the municipality.
 (ii) Capital improvements contained in the capital improvements plan, the construction
 of which has been completed.
 (iii) Unavoidable delays beyond the responsibility or control of the municipality in the
 construction of capital improvements contained in the plan.
 (iv) Significant changes in the land use assumptions.
 (v) Changes in the estimated costs of the proposed transportation capital improvements,
 which may be recalculated by applying the construction cost index as published in
 the American City/County magazine or the Engineering News Record.
 (vi) Significant changes in the projected revenue from all sources listed needed for the
 construction of the transportation capital improvements.
 (f) Any improvements to Federal-aid or State highways to be funded in part by impact fees
 shall require the approval of the Department of Transportation and, if necessary,
 the United States Department of Transportation. Nothing in this act shall be deemed
 to alter or diminish the powers, duties or jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation
 with respect to State highways or the rural State highway system.
 (g) Two or more municipalities may, upon agreement, appoint a joint impact fee advisory
 committee which may develop roadway sufficiency analyses and transportation capital
 improvements plans for the participating municipalities. The members of the advisory
 committee must be either residents of or conduct business within one of the participating
 municipalities.
 (504-A amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u505-As
 Section 505-A. Establishment and Administration of Impact Fees.--(a) (1) The impact fee for transportation capital
 improvements shall be based upon the total costs of the road improvements included
 in the adopted capital improvement plan within a given transportation service area
 attributable to and necessitated by new development within the service area as calculated
 pursuant to section 504-A(e)(1)(iv)(C), divided by the number of anticipated peak
 hour trips generated by all new development consistent with the adopted land use assumptions
 and calculated in accordance with the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute
 of Transportation Engineers, fourth or subsequent edition as adopted by the municipality
 by ordinance or resolution to equal a per trip cost for transportation improvements
 within the service area.
 (2) The specific impact fee for a specific new development or subdivision within the service
 area for road improvements shall be determined as of the date of preliminary land
 development or subdivision approval by multiplying the per trip cost established for
 the service area as determined in section 503-A(a) by the estimated number of peak
 hour trips to be generated by the new development or subdivision using generally accepted
 traffic engineering standards.
 (3) A municipality may authorize or require the preparation of a special transportation
 study in order to determine traffic generation or circulation for a new nonresidential
 development to assist in the determination of the amount of the transportation fee
 for such development or subdivision. The municipality shall set forth by ordinance
 the circumstances in which such a study should be authorized or required, provided
 however, that no special transportation study shall be required when there is no deviation
 from the land use assumptions resulting in increased density, intensity or trip generation
 by a particular development. A developer or municipality may, however, at any time,
 voluntarily prepare and submit a traffic study for a proposed development or may have
 such a study prepared at its expense after the development is completed to include
 actual trips generated by the development for use in any appeal as provided for under
 this act. The special transportation study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic
 or transportation engineer using procedures and methods established by the municipality
 based on generally accepted transportation planning and engineering standards. The
 study, where required by the municipality, shall be submitted prior to the imposition
 of an impact fee and shall be taken into consideration by the municipality in increasing
 or reducing the amount of the impact fee for the new development for the amount shown
 on the impact fee schedule adopted by the municipality.
 (b) The governing body shall enact an impact ordinance setting forth a description of
 the boundaries and a fee schedule for each transportation service area. At least ten
 working days prior to the adoption of the ordinance at a public meeting, the ordinance
 shall be available for public inspection. The impact fee ordinance shall include,
 but not be limited to, those provisions set forth in section 503-A(a) and conform
 with the standards, provisions and procedures set forth in this act.
 (c) (1) A municipality may give notice of its intention to adopt an impact fee ordinance by
 publishing a statement of such intention twice in one newspaper of general circulation
 in the municipality. The first publication shall not occur before the adoption of
 the resolution by which the municipality establishes its impact fee advisory committee.
 The second publication shall occur not less than one nor more than three weeks thereafter.
 (2) A municipal impact fee ordinance adopted under and pursuant to this act may provide
 that the provisions of the ordinance may have retroactive application, for a period
 not to exceed 18 months after the adoption of the resolution creating an impact fee
 advisory committee pursuant to section 504-A(b)(1), to preliminary or tentative applications
 for land development, subdivision or PRD with the municipality on or after the first
 publication of the municipality's intention to adopt an impact fee ordinance; provided,
 however, that the impact fee imposed on building permits for construction of new development
 approved pursuant to such applications filed during the period of pendancy shall not
 exceed $1,000 per anticipated peak hour trip as calculated in accordance with the
 generally accepted traffic engineering standards as set forth under the provisions
 of subsection (a)(1) or the subsequently adopted fee established by the ordinance,
 whichever is less.
 (3) No action upon an application for land development, subdivision or PRD shall be postponed,
 delayed or extended by the municipality because adoption of a municipal impact fee
 ordinance is being considered. Furthermore, the adoption of an impact fee ordinance
 more than 18 months after adoption of a resolution creating the impact fee advisory
 committee shall not be retroactive or applicable to plats submitted for preliminary
 or tentative approval prior to the legal publication of the proposed impact fee ordinance
 and any fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be refunded to the payor
 of such fees; provided the adoption of the impact fee ordinance was not delayed due
 to the initiation of any litigation challenging the adoption of such ordinance.
 (d) Any impact fees collected by a municipality pursuant to a municipal ordinance shall
 be deposited by the municipality into an interest-bearing fund account designated
 solely for impact fees, clearly identifying the transportation service area from which
 the fee was received. Funds collected in one transportation service area must be accounted
 for and expended within that transportation service area, and such funds shall only
 be expended for that portion of the transportation capital improvements identified
 as being funded by impact fees under the transportation capital improvements plan.
 Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, municipalities may expend impact
 fees paid by an applicant on projects not contained in the adopted transportation
 capital improvement plan or may provide credit against impact fees for the value of
 any construction projects not contained in the transportation capital improvement
 plan which are performed at the applicant's expense if all of the following criteria
 are met:
 (1) The applicant has provided written consent to use of its collected impact fees or
 the provision of such credit against the applicant's impact fees for specific transportation
 projects which are not included in the transportation capital improvement plan.
 (2) The alternative transportation projects, whether highway or multimodal, have as their
 purpose the reduction of traffic congestion or the removal of vehicle trips from the
 roadway network.
 (3) The municipality amends its transportation capital improvement plan components required
 by section 504-A(e)(1)(vi) to provide replacement of the collected impact fees transferred
 to transportation projects outside the approved transportation capital improvement
 plan from sources other than impact fees or developer contributions within three years
 of completion of the alternative projects to which the transferred fees were applied
 or for which credit was provided. All interest earned on such funds shall become funds
 of that account. The municipality shall provide that an accounting be made annually
 for any fund account containing impact fee proceeds and earned interest. Such accounting
 shall include, but not be limited to, the total funds collected, the source of the
 funds collected, the total amount of interest accruing on such funds and the amount
 of funds expended on specific transportation improvements. Notice of the availability
 of the results of the accounting shall be included and published as part of the annual
 audit required of municipalities. A copy of the report shall also be provided to the
 advisory committee.
 (e) All transportation impact fees imposed under the terms of this act shall be payable
 at the time of the issuance of building permits for the applicable new development
 or subdivision. The municipality may not require the applicant to provide a guarantee
 of financial security for the payment of any transportation impact fees, except the
 municipality may provide for the deposit with the municipality of financial security
 in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the construction of any road improvement
 contained in the transportation capital improvement plan which is performed by the
 applicant.
 (f) An applicant shall be entitled to a credit against the impact fee in the amount of
 the fair market value of any land dedicated by the applicant to the municipality for
 future right-of-way, realignment or widening of any existing roadways or for the value
 of any construction of road improvements contained in the transportation capital improvement
 program which is performed at the applicant's expense. The amount of such credit for
 any capital improvement constructed shall be the amount allocated in the capital improvement
 program, including contingency factors, for such work. The fair market value of any
 land dedicated by the applicant shall be determined as of the date of the submission
 of the land development or subdivision application to the municipality.
 (g) Impact fees previously collected by a municipality shall be refunded, together with
 earned accrued interest thereon, to the payor of such fees from the date of payment
 under any of the following circumstances:
 (1) In the event that a municipality terminates or completes an adopted capital improvements
 plan for a transportation service area and there remains at the time of termination
 or completion undispersed funds in the accounts established for that purpose, the
 municipality shall provide written notice by certified mail to those persons who previously
 paid the fees which remain undispersed of the availability of said funds for refund
 of the person's proportionate share of the fund balance. The allocation of the refund
 shall be determined by generally accepted accounting practices. In the event that
 any of the funds remain unclaimed following one year after the notice, which notice
 shall be provided to the last known address provided by the payor of the fees to the
 municipality, the municipality shall be authorized to transfer any funds so remaining
 to any other fund in the municipality without any further obligation to refund said
 funds.
 (2) If the municipality fails to commence construction of any transportation service area
 road improvements within three years of the scheduled construction date set forth
 in the transportation capital improvements plan, any person who paid any impact fees
 pursuant to that transportation capital improvements plan shall, upon written request
 to the municipality, receive a refund of that portion of the fee attributable to the
 contribution for the uncommenced road improvement, plus the interest accumulated thereon
 from the date of payment.
 (3) If, upon completion of any road improvements project, the actual expenditures of the
 capital project are less than 95% of the costs properly allocable to the fee paid
 within the transportation service area in which the completed road improvement was
 adopted, the municipality shall refund the pro rata difference between the budgeted
 costs and the actual expenditures, including interest accumulated thereon from the
 date of payment, to the person or persons who paid the impact fees for such improvements.
 (4) If the new development for which transportation impact fees were paid is not commenced
 prior to the expiration of building permits issued for the new development within
 the time limits established by applicable building codes within the municipality or
 if the building permit as issued for the new development is altered and the alteration
 results in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due in accordance with the calculations
 set forth in subsection (a)(1).
 (h) Where an impact fee ordinance has been adopted pursuant to the other provisions of
 this act, the ordinance may impose an additional impact fee upon new developments
 which generate 1,000 or more new peak hour trips, net of pass-by trips as defined
 by the current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation
 Manual, during the peak hour period designated in the ordinance. In such case, the
 impact fee ordinance adopted under this act may require the applicant for such a development
 to perform a traffic analysis of development traffic impact on highways, roads or
 streets outside the transportation service area in which the development site is located
 but within the boundaries of the municipality or municipalities adopting a joint municipal
 impact fee ordinance or municipalities which are participating in a joint municipal
 authority authorized to impose impact fees by this article. Any such highways, roads
 or streets or parts thereof outside the transportation service area which will accommodate
 10% or more of development traffic and 100 or more new peak hour trips may be required
 to be studied, and the ordinance may require the applicant to mitigate the traffic
 impacts of the development on such highways, roads and streets to maintain the predevelopment
 conditions after completion of the development.
 (505-A amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u506-As
 Section 506-A. Appeals.--(a) Any person required to pay an impact fee shall have the right to contest the land
 use assumptions, the development and implementation of the transportation capital
 improvement program, the imposition of impact fees, the periodic updating of the transportation
 capital improvement program, the refund of impact fees and all other matters relating
 to impact fees, including the constitutionality or validity of the impact fee ordinance
 by filing an appeal with the court of common pleas.
 (b) A master may be appointed by the court to hear testimony on the issues and return
 the record and a transcript of the testimony, together with a report and recommendations,
 or the court may appoint a master to hold a nonrecord hearing and to make recommendations
 and return the same to the court, in which case either party may demand a hearing
 de novo before the court.
 (c) Any cost incurred by parties in such an appeal shall be the separate responsibility
 of the parties.
 (506-A added Dec. 19, 1990, P.L.1343, No.209)
 19680247u507-As
 Section 507-A. Prerequisites for Assessing Sewer and Water Tap-in Fees.--(a) No municipality may charge any tap-in connection or other similar fee as a condition
 of connection to a municipally owned sewer or water system unless such fee is calculated
 as provided in the applicable provisions of the act of May 2, 1945, (P.L.382, No.164),
 known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
 (b) Where a municipally owned water or sewer system is to be extended at the expense of
 the owner or owners of properties or where the municipality otherwise would construct
 the connection end or customer facilities services (other than water meter installation),
 the property owner or owners shall have the right to construct such extension or make
 such connection and install such customer facilities himself or themselves or through
 a subcontractor in accordance with the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
 (c) Where a property owner or owners construct or cause to be constructed any addition,
 expansion or extension to or of a sewer or water system of a municipality whereby
 such addition, expansion or extension provides future excess capacity to accommodate
 future development upon the lands of others, the municipality shall provide for the
 reimbursement to the property owner or owners in accordance with the provisions of
 the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
 (507-A added Dec. 19, 1990, P.L.1343, No.209)
 19680247u508-As
 Section 508-A. Joint Municipal Impact Fee Ordinance.--(a) For the purpose of permitting municipalities which cooperatively plan for their future
 to also provide for transportation capital improvements in a cooperative manner, the
 governing bodies of each municipality which has adopted a joint municipal comprehensive
 plan pursuant to Article XI in accordance with the conditions and procedures set forth
 in this article may cooperate with one or more municipalities to enact, amend and
 repeal joint transportation impact fee ordinances to accomplish the purposes of this
 act in accordance with this article.
 (b) The procedures set forth in this article shall be applicable to the enactment of a
 joint municipal impact fee ordinance.
 (c) Each municipality party to a joint municipal impact fee ordinance shall approve the
 advisory committee and shall adopt the land use assumptions, roadway sufficiency analysis,
 capital improvement plan and ordinances and amendments thereto in accordance with
 the procedures in this article, and no such ordinance shall become effective until
 it has been properly adopted by all the participating municipalities.
 (508-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u601h
 ARTICLE VI
 Zoning
 19680247u601s
 Section 601. General Powers.--The governing body of each municipality, in accordance with the conditions
 and procedures set forth in this act, may enact, amend and repeal zoning ordinances
 to implement comprehensive plans and to accomplish any of the purposes of this act.
 19680247u602s
 Section 602. County Powers.--The powers of the governing bodies of counties to enact, amend and
 repeal zoning ordinances shall be limited to land in those municipalities, wholly
 or partly within the county, which have no zoning ordinance in effect at the time
 a zoning ordinance is introduced before the governing body of the county and until
 the municipality's zoning ordinance is in effect. The enactment of a zoning ordinance
 by any municipality, other than the county, whose land is subject to county zoning
 shall act as a repeal protanto of the county zoning ordinance within the municipality
 adopting such ordinance.
 19680247u602.1s
 Section 602.1. County Review; Dispute Resolution.--The county planning commission shall offer a mediation
 option to any municipality which believes that its citizens will experience harm as
 the result of the adoption of a zoning ordinance or an amendment to an existing zoning
 ordinance in a contiguous municipality if the contiguous municipalities agree. In
 exercising such an option, the municipalities shall comply with the procedures set
 forth in Article IX. The cost of the mediation shall be shared equally by the parties
 unless otherwise agreed.
 (602.1 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u603s
 Section 603. Ordinance Provisions.--(a) Zoning ordinances should reflect the policy goals of the statement of community development
 objectives required in section 606, and give consideration to the character of the
 municipality, the needs of the citizens and the suitabilities and special nature of
 particular parts of the municipality.
 (b) Zoning ordinances, except to the extent that those regulations of mineral extraction
 by local ordinances and enactments have heretofore been superseded and preempted by
 the act of May 31, 1945 (P.L.1198, No.418), known as the "Surface Mining Conservation
 and Reclamation Act," the act of December 19, 1984 (P.L.1093, No.219), known as the
 "Noncoal Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act," and the act of December
 19, 1984 (P.L.1140, No.223), known as the "Oil and Gas Act," and to the extent that
 the subsidence impacts of coal extraction are regulated by the act of April 27, 1966
 (1st Sp.Sess., P.L.31, No.1), known as "The Bituminous Mine Subsidence and Land Conservation
 Act," and that regulation of activities related to commercial agricultural production
 would exceed the requirements imposed under the act of May 20, 1993 (P.L.12, No.6),
 known as the "Nutrient Management Act," regardless of whether any agricultural operation
 within the area to be affected by the ordinance would be a concentrated animal operation
 as defined by the "Nutrient Management Act," the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L.128, No.43),
 known as the "Agricultural Area Security Law," or the act of June 10, 1982 (P.L.454,
 No.133), entitled "An act protecting agricultural operations from nuisance suits and
 ordinances under certain circumstances," or that regulation of other activities are
 preempted by other Federal or State laws, may permit, prohibit, regulate, restrict
 and determine:
 (1) Uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water.
 (2) Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration,
 razing, removal and use of structures.
 (3) Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures,
 as well as areas, courts, yards, and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied
 by uses and structures.
 (4) Density of population and intensity of use.
 (5) Protection and preservation of natural and historic resources and prime agricultural
 land and activities.
 (c) Zoning ordinances may contain:
 (1) provisions for special exceptions and variances administered by the zoning hearing
 board, which provisions shall be in accordance with this act;
 (2) provisions for conditional uses to be allowed or denied by the governing body after
 recommendations by the planning agency and hearing, pursuant to express standards
 and criteria set forth in the zoning ordinance. Notice of hearings on conditional
 uses shall be provided in accordance with section 908(1), and notice of the decision
 shall be provided in accordance with section 908(10). In allowing a conditional use,
 the governing body may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, other than
 those related to off-site transportation or road improvements, in addition to those
 expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
 this act and the zoning ordinance;
 (2.1) ((2.1) deleted by amendment June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (2.2) provisions for regulating transferable development rights, on a voluntary basis, including
 provisions for the protection of persons acquiring the same, in accordance with express
 standards and criteria set forth in the ordinance and section 619.1;
 (3) provisions for the administration and enforcement of such ordinances;
 (4) such other provisions as may be necessary to implement the purposes of this act;
 (5) provisions to encourage innovation and to promote flexibility, economy and ingenuity
 in development, including subdivisions and land developments as defined in this act;
 (6) provisions authorizing increases in the permissible density of population or intensity
 of a particular use based upon expressed standards and criteria set forth in the zoning
 ordinance; and
 (7) provisions to promote and preserve prime agricultural land, environmentally sensitive
 areas and areas of historic significance.
 ((c) amended July 4, 2008, P.L.319, No.39)
 (d) Zoning ordinances may include provisions regulating the siting, density and design
 of residential, commercial, industrial and other developments in order to assure the
 availability of reliable, safe and adequate water supplies to support the intended
 land uses within the capacity of available water resources.
 (e) Zoning ordinances may not unduly restrict the display of religious symbols on property
 being used for religious purposes.
 (f) Zoning ordinances may not unreasonably restrict forestry activities. To encourage
 maintenance and management of forested or wooded open space and promote the conduct
 of forestry as a sound and economically viable use of forested land throughout this
 Commonwealth, forestry activities, including, but not limited to, timber harvesting,
 shall be a permitted use by right in all zoning districts in every municipality.
 (g) (1) Zoning ordinances shall protect prime agricultural land and may promote the establishment
 of agricultural security areas.
 (2) Zoning ordinances shall provide for protection of natural and historic features and
 resources.
 (h) Zoning ordinances shall encourage the continuity, development and viability of agricultural
 operations. Zoning ordinances may not restrict agricultural operations or changes
 to or expansions of agricultural operations in geographic areas where agriculture
 has traditionally been present unless the agricultural operation will have a direct
 adverse effect on the public health and safety. Nothing in this subsection shall require
 a municipality to adopt a zoning ordinance that violates or exceeds the provisions
 of the act of May 20, 1993 (P.L.12, No.6), known as the "Nutrient Management Act,"
 the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L.128, No.43), known as the "Agricultural Area Security
 Law," or the act of June 10, 1982 (P.L.454, No.133), entitled "An act protecting agricultural
 operations from nuisance suits and ordinances under certain circumstances."
 (i) Zoning ordinances shall provide for the reasonable development of minerals in each
 municipality.
 (j) Zoning ordinances adopted by municipalities shall be generally consistent with the
 municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive plan or, where none exists, with the municipal
 statement of community development objectives and the county comprehensive plan. If
 a municipality amends its zoning ordinance in a manner not generally consistent with
 its comprehensive plan, it shall concurrently amend its comprehensive plan in accordance
 with Article III.
 (k) A municipality may amend its comprehensive plan at any time, provided that the comprehensive
 plan remains generally consistent with the county comprehensive plan and compatible
 with the comprehensive plans of abutting municipalities.
 (l) Zoning ordinances shall permit no-impact home-based businesses in all residential
 zones of the municipality as a use permitted by right, except that such permission
 shall not supersede any deed restriction, covenant or agreement restricting the use
 of land nor any master deed, bylaw or other document applicable to a common interest
 ownership community. ((l) added May 9, 2002, P.L.305, No.43)
 (603 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u603.1s
 Section 603.1. Interpretation of Ordinance Provisions.--In interpreting the language of zoning ordinances
 to determine the extent of the restriction upon the use of the property, the language
 shall be interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the language
 written and enacted by the governing body, in favor of the property owner and against
 any implied extension of the restriction.
 19680247u604s
 Section 604. Zoning Purposes.--The provisions of zoning ordinances shall be designed:
 (1) To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public health,
 safety, morals, and the general welfare; coordinated and practical community development
 and proper density of population; emergency management preparedness and operations,
 airports, and national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air,
 access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space,
 transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational facilities, public grounds,
 the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
 agricultural or industrial use, and other public requirements; as well as preservation
 of the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of
 forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
 (2) To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
 congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire,
 flood, panic or other dangers.
 (3) To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography, soil type and classification,
 and present use.
 (4) To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential housing of
 various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family
 and two-family dwellings, and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various
 arrangements, mobile homes and mobile home parks, provided, however, that no zoning
 ordinance shall be deemed invalid for the failure to provide for any other specific
 dwelling type.
 (5) To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment
 growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types
 and nonresidential uses.
 19680247u605s
 Section 605. Classifications.--In any municipality, other than a county, which enacts a zoning
 ordinance, no part of such municipality shall be left unzoned. The provisions of all
 zoning ordinances may be classified so that different provisions may be applied to
 different classes of situations, uses and structures and to such various districts
 of the municipality as shall be described by a map made part of the zoning ordinance.
 Where zoning districts are created, all provisions shall be uniform for each class
 of uses or structures, within each district, except that additional classifications
 may be made within any district:
 (1) For the purpose of making transitional provisions at and near the boundaries of districts.
 (1.1) For the purpose of regulating nonconforming uses and structures.
 (2) For the regulation, restriction or prohibition of uses and structures at, along or
 near:
 (i) major thoroughfares, their intersections and interchanges, transportation arteries
 and rail or transit terminals;
 (ii) natural or artificial bodies of water, boat docks and related facilities;
 (iii) places of relatively steep slope or grade, or other areas of hazardous geological
 or topographic features;
 (iv) public buildings and public grounds;
 (v) aircraft, helicopter, rocket, and spacecraft facilities;
 (vi) places having unique historical, architectural or patriotic interest or value; or
 (vii) flood plain areas, agricultural areas, sanitary landfills, and other places having
 a special character or use affecting and affected by their surroundings.
 As among several classes of zoning districts, the provisions for permitted uses may
 be mutually exclusive, in whole or in part.
 (3) For the purpose of encouraging innovation and the promotion of flexibility, economy
 and ingenuity in development, including subdivisions and land developments as defined
 in this act, and for the purpose of authorizing increases in the permissible density
 of population or intensity of a particular use based upon expressed standards and
 criteria set forth in the zoning ordinance.
 (4) For the purpose of regulating transferable development rights on a voluntary basis.
 19680247u606s
 Section 606. Statement of Community Development Objectives.--Zoning ordinances enacted after the
 effective date of this act should reflect the policy goals of the municipality as
 listed in a statement of community development objectives, recognizing that circumstances
 can necessitate the adoption and timely pursuit of new goals and the enactment of
 new zoning ordinances which may neither require nor allow for the completion of a
 new comprehensive plan and approval of new community development objectives. This
 statement may be supplied by reference to the community comprehensive plan or such
 portions of the community comprehensive plan as may exist and be applicable or may
 be the statement of community development objectives provided in a statement of legislative
 findings of the governing body of the municipality with respect to land use; density
 of population; the need for housing, commerce and industry; the location and function
 of streets and other community facilities and utilities; the need for preserving agricultural
 land and protecting natural resources; and any other factors that the municipality
 believes relevant in describing the purposes and intent of the zoning ordinance.
 19680247u607s
 Section 607. Preparation of Proposed Zoning Ordinance.--(a) The text and map of the proposed zoning ordinance, as well as all necessary studies
 and surveys preliminary thereto, shall be prepared by the planning agency of each
 municipality upon request by the governing body.
 (b) In preparing a proposed zoning ordinance, the planning agency shall hold at least
 one public meeting pursuant to public notice and may hold additional public meetings
 upon such notice as it shall determine to be advisable.
 (c) Upon the completion of its work, the planning agency shall present to the governing
 body the proposed zoning ordinance, together with recommendations and explanatory
 materials.
 (d) The procedure set forth in this section shall be a condition precedent to the validity
 of a zoning ordinance adopted pursuant to this act.
 (e) If a county planning agency shall have been created for the county in which the municipality
 adopting the ordinance is located, then at least 45 days prior to the public hearing
 by the local governing body as provided in section 608, the municipality shall submit
 the proposed ordinance to said county planning agency for recommendations.
 19680247u608s
 Section 608. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance.--Before voting on the enactment of a zoning ordinance,
 the governing body shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice,
 and pursuant to mailed notice and electronic notice to any owner of a tract or parcel
 of land located within a municipality or an owner of the mineral rights in a tract
 or parcel of land within the municipality who has made a timely request in accordance
 with section 109. The vote on the enactment by the governing body shall be within
 90 days after the last public hearing. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the
 zoning ordinance shall be forwarded to the county planning agency or, in counties
 where no planning agency exists, to the governing body of the county in which the
 municipality is located.
 (608 amended July 2, 2013, P.L.201, No.36)
 19680247u608.1s
 Section 608.1. Municipal Authorities and Water Companies.--(a) A municipal authority, water company or any other municipality that plans to expand
 water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer service via a new main extension to a proposed
 development that has not received any municipal approvals within the municipality
 shall notify the municipality by certified mail, return receipt requested, of its
 intention and shall provide the municipality an opportunity to provide written comment
 on whether the proposed expansion of service within the municipality is generally
 consistent with the zoning ordinance.
 (b) The purpose of the requirement of this section is to provide the municipal authority,
 water company or any other municipality with information regarding how its decision
 to expand service may potentially enhance and support or conflict with or negatively
 impact on the land use planning of municipalities.
 (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the right of a municipal authority,
 water company or any other municipality to expand service as otherwise permitted by
 law.
 (d) Except as provided in section 619.2, nothing in this act shall be construed as limiting
 the authority of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission over the implementation,
 location, construction and maintenance of public utility facilities. The requirement
 of this section shall not apply to an expansion of service by a municipal authority,
 water company or other municipality which is ordered by a court or a Federal or State
 agency.
 (e) As used in this section:
 (1) A "decision to expand service within the municipality" shall mean a decision to expand
 the number of its individual service connections for distribution or collection within
 a municipality as a result of a main extension, but if the number of individual service
 connections are not being increased, locating or acquiring transmission lines or interceptors
 or wells, reservoirs, aquifers, pump stations, water storage tanks or other facilities
 by a municipal authority or water company in a new area of a municipality shall not
 be deemed an expansion of service.
 (2) A "water company" shall include any person or corporation, including a municipal corporation
 operating beyond its corporate limits, which furnishes water to or for the public
 for compensation.
 (f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a municipality to regulate
 the allocation or withdrawal of water resources by any person, municipal authority
 or water company that is otherwise regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
 or other Federal or State agencies or statutes.
 (608.1 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u609s
 Section 609. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments.--(a) For the preparation of amendments to zoning ordinances, the procedure set forth in
 section 607 for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance shall be optional.
 (b) (1) Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the governing body shall hold a public
 hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice, and pursuant to mailed notice and electronic
 notice to an owner of a tract or parcel of land located within a municipality or an
 owner of the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the municipality who
 has made a timely request in accordance with section 109. In addition, if the proposed
 amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously
 posted by the municipality at points deemed sufficient by the municipality along the
 tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall
 be posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing. ((1) amended July 2,
 2013, P.L.201, No.36)
 (2) (i) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted under clause (1), where the proposed
 amendment involves a zoning map change, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed
 by the municipality at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first class
 mail to the addressees to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property
 located within the area being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the possession
 of the municipality. The notice shall include the location, date and time of the public
 hearing. A good faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy the requirements
 of this subsection.
 (ii) This clause shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
 ((b) amended Jan. 11, 2002, P.L.13, No.2)
 (c) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the planning agency, the governing
 body shall submit each such amendment to the planning agency at least 30 days prior
 to the hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the planning agency an opportunity
 to submit recommendations.
 (d) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed
 substantially, or is revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the governing
 body shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, mailed notice and
 electronic notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment. ((d) amended July 2,
 2013, P.L.201, No.36)
 (e) If a county planning agency shall have been created for the county in which the municipality
 proposing the amendment is located, then at least 30 days prior to the public hearing
 on the amendment by the local governing body, the municipality shall submit the proposed
 amendment to the county planning agency for recommendations.
 (f) The municipality may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings
 authorized by this section. In exercising such an option, the municipality and mediating
 parties shall meet the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth in Article
 IX.
 (g) Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to the zoning ordinance shall
 be forwarded to the county planning agency or, in counties where no planning agency
 exists, to the governing body of the county in which the municipality is located.
 19680247u609.1s
 Section 609.1. Procedure for Landowner Curative Amendments.--(a) A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of a zoning
 ordinance or map or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or
 development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to
 the governing body with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment
 be heard and decided as provided in section 916.1. The governing body shall commence
 a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request as provided in section 916.1. The
 curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the planning agency or agencies
 as provided in section 609 and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided
 in section 610 and in section 916.1.
 (b) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 908 and all references therein
 to the zoning hearing board shall, for purposes of this section be references to the
 governing body: provided, however, That the provisions of section 908(1.2) and (9)
 shall not apply and the provisions of section 916.1 shall control. If a municipality
 does not accept a landowner's curative amendment brought in accordance with this subsection
 and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision
 shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire zoning ordinance and
 map, but only for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's curative
 amendment and challenge. ((b) amended Jan. 11, 2002, P.L.13, No.2 and May 9, 2002,
 P.L.305, No.43)
 (c) The governing body of a municipality which has determined that a validity challenge
 has merit may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without revision, or
 may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The governing
 body shall consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted
 by the landowner and shall also consider:
 (1) the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and
 other public service facilities;
 (2) if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional
 housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of
 a type actually available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
 excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
 (3) the suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils,
 slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
 features;
 (4) the impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
 plains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are protected
 or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental
 impacts; and
 (5) the impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses
 which are essential to public health and welfare.
 19680247u609.2s
 Section 609.2. Procedure for Municipal Curative Amendments.--If a municipality determines that its
 zoning ordinance or any portion thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the
 following actions:
 (1) A municipality shall declare by formal action, its zoning ordinance or portions thereof
 substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome such
 invalidity. Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal the governing body
 of the municipality shall:
 (i) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of the
 zoning ordinance which may include:
 (A) references to specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in sufficient
 quantity;
 (B) reference to a class of use or uses which require revision; or
 (C) reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
 (ii) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the zoning ordinance to correct
 the declared invalidity.
 (2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the municipality shall
 enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the validity of, its zoning ordinance
 pursuant to the provisions required by section 609 in order to cure the declared invalidity
 of the zoning ordinance.
 (3) Upon the initiation of the procedures, as set forth in clause (1), the governing body
 shall not be required to entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment
 filed under section 609.1 nor shall the zoning hearing board be required to give a
 report requested under section 909.1 or 916.1 subsequent to the declaration and proposal
 based upon the grounds identical to or substantially similar to those specified in
 the resolution required by clause (1)(a). Upon completion of the procedures as set
 forth in clauses (1) and (2), no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of sections
 609.1 and 916.1 shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal, accrue to any
 landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of the unamended zoning ordinance
 for which there has been a curative amendment pursuant to this section.
 (4) A municipality having utilized the procedures as set forth in clauses (1) and (2)
 may not again utilize said procedure for a 36-month period following the date of the
 enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the validity of its zoning
 ordinance, pursuant to clause (2); provided, however, if after the date of declaration
 and proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon the municipality
 by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision,
 the municipality may utilize the provisions of this section to prepare a curative
 amendment to its ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
 19680247u610s
 Section 610. Publication, Advertisement and Availability of Ordinances.--(a) Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
 enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall include the
 time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a reference to
 a place within the municipality where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment
 may be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the cost
 thereof. The governing body shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment once
 in one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality not more than 60 days
 nor less than 7 days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment
 shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared
 by the municipal solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail.
 If the full text is not included:
 (1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
 at the time the public notice is published.
 (2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the county law library
 or other county office designated by the county commissioners, who may impose a fee
 no greater than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
 (b) In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed ordinance or amendment,
 before voting upon enactment, the governing body shall, at least ten days prior to
 enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality,
 a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with
 a summary of the amendments.
 (c) Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into official ordinance books
 by reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
 19680247u611s
 Section 611. Publication After Enactment.--(611 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u613s
 Section 613. Registration of Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots.--Zoning ordinances may contain
 provisions requiring the zoning officer to identify and register nonconforming uses,
 structures and lots, together with the reasons why the zoning officer identified them
 as nonconformities.
 19680247u614s
 Section 614. Appointment and Powers of Zoning Officer.--For the administration of a zoning ordinance,
 a zoning officer, who shall not hold any elective office in the municipality, shall
 be appointed. The zoning officer shall meet qualifications established by the municipality
 and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the municipality a working
 knowledge of municipal zoning. The zoning officer shall administer the zoning ordinance
 in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction
 or any use or change of use which does not conform to the zoning ordinance. Zoning
 officers may be authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
 enforcement when acting within the scope of their employment.
 19680247u615s
 Section 615. Zoning Appeals.--All appeals from decisions of the zoning officer shall be taken in
 the manner set forth in this act.
 19680247u616s
 Section 616. Enforcement Penalties.--(616 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u616.1s
 Section 616.1. Enforcement Notice.--(a) If it appears to the municipality that a violation of any zoning ordinance enacted
 under this act or prior enabling laws has occurred, the municipality shall initiate
 enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
 (b) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which
 the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive
 enforcement notices regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing
 by the owner of record.
 (c) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
 (1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality
 intends to take action.
 (2) The location of the property in violation.
 (3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been
 met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.
 (4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
 which the steps must be completed.
 (5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the zoning hearing board
 within a prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in the
 ordinance.
 (6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended
 by appeal to the zoning hearing board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
 clearly described.
 (d) In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the zoning hearing board, the municipality
 shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence first. ((d) added Dec. 18,
 1996, P.L.1102, No.165)
 (e) Any filing fee paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the zoning hearing
 board shall be returned to the appealing party by the municipality if the zoning hearing
 board or any court in a subsequent appeal rules in the appealing party's favor. ((e)
 added Dec. 18, 1996, P.L.1102, No.165)
 19680247u617s
 Section 617. Causes of Action.--In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is
 proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained
 or used in violation of any ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling laws,
 the governing body or, with the approval of the governing body, an officer of the
 municipality, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
 property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition
 to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
 restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent,
 in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
 When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action
 shall be served upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action
 is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the governing body of the municipality.
 No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
 19680247u617.1s
 Section 617.1. Jurisdiction.--District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
 brought under section 617.2.
 19680247u617.1v
 Compiler's Note: Section 28 of Act 207 of 2004 provided that any and all references in any other law
 to a "district justice" or "justice of the peace" shall be deemed to be references
 to a magisterial district judge.
 19680247u617.2s
 Section 617.2. Enforcement Remedies.--(a) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the
 violation of the provisions of any zoning ordinance enacted under this act or prior
 enabling laws shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
 commenced by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
 including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a municipality as a result thereof.
 No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
 determination of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays
 nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant
 to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
 constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there
 has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
 person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there
 was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one
 such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation
 by the district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute
 a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected
 for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the municipality whose
 ordinance has been violated.
 (b) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
 tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
 (c) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
 person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for
 enforcement pursuant to this section.
 19680247u617.2v
 Compiler's Note: Section 28 of Act 207 of 2004 provided that any and all references in any other law
 to a "district justice" or "justice of the peace" shall be deemed to be references
 to a magisterial district judge.
 19680247u617.3s
 Section 617.3. Finances and Expenditures.--(a) The governing body may appropriate funds to finance the preparation of zoning ordinances
 and shall appropriate funds for administration, for enforcement and for actions to
 support or oppose, upon appeal to the courts, decisions of the zoning hearing board.
 (b) The governing body shall make provision in its budget and appropriate funds for the
 operation of the zoning hearing board.
 (c) The zoning hearing board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of legal
 counsel, as the need arises. The legal counsel shall be an attorney other than the
 municipal solicitor. The board may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation
 of experts and other staff and may contract for services as it shall deem necessary.
 The compensation of legal counsel, experts and staff and the sums expended for services
 shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for this use.
 (d) For the same purposes, the governing body may accept gifts and grants of money and
 services from private sources and from the county, State and Federal Governments.
 (e) The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to the administration
 of a zoning ordinance and with respect to hearings before the zoning hearing board.
 Fees for these hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of
 the zoning hearing board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative
 overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses
 of the zoning hearing board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
 consultants or expert witness costs.
 19680247u618s
 Section 618. Finances.--(618 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u619s
 Section 619. Exemptions.--This article shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or
 extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if, upon petition
 of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public
 hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question
 is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be
 the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure that both
 the corporation and the municipality in which the building or proposed building is
 located have notice of the hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present
 witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise
 the rights of a party to the proceedings.
 19680247u619.1s
 Section 619.1. Transferable Development Rights.--(a) To and only to the extent a local ordinance enacted in accordance with this article
 and Article VII so provides, there is hereby created, as a separate estate in land,
 the development rights therein, and the same are declared to be severable and separately
 conveyable from the estate in fee simple to which they are applicable.
 (b) The development rights shall be conveyed by a deed duly recorded in the office of
 the recorder of deeds in and for the county in which the municipality whose ordinance
 authorizes such conveyance is located.
 (c) The recorder of deeds shall not accept for recording any such instrument of conveyance
 unless there is endorsed thereon the approval of the municipal governing body having
 zoning or planned residential development jurisdiction over the land within which
 the development rights are to be conveyed, dated not more than 60 days prior to the
 recording.
 (d) No development rights shall be transferable beyond the boundaries of the municipality
 wherein the lands from which the development rights arise are situated, except that,
 in the case of a joint municipal zoning ordinance or a written agreement among two
 or more municipalities, development rights shall be transferable within the boundaries
 of the municipalities comprising the joint municipal zoning ordinance or, where there
 is a written agreement, the boundaries of the municipalities who are parties to the
 agreement. ((d) amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u619.2s
 Section 619.2. Effect of Comprehensive Plans and Zoning Ordinances.--(a) When a county adopts a comprehensive plan in accordance with sections 301 and 302
 and any municipalities therein have adopted comprehensive plans and zoning ordinances
 in accordance with sections 301, 303(d) and 603(j), Commonwealth agencies shall consider
 and may rely upon comprehensive plans and zoning ordinances when reviewing applications
 for the funding or permitting of infrastructure or facilities. ((a) amended Dec. 20,
 2000, P.L.940, No.127)
 (b) The Center for Local Government Services shall work with municipalities to coordinate
 Commonwealth agency program resources with municipal planning and zoning activities.
 Upon request, the Center for Local Government Services shall assist municipalities
 in identifying and assessing the impact of Commonwealth agency decisions and their
 effect on municipal and multimunicipal planning and zoning. Upon the authorization
 of the Governor, the Center for Local Government Services shall have access to information,
 services, functions and other resources in the possession of executive agencies under
 the Governor's jurisdiction to fulfill its obligations under this section.
 (c) When municipalities adopt a joint municipal zoning ordinance:
 (1) Commonwealth agencies shall consider and may rely upon the joint municipal zoning
 ordinance for the funding or permitting of infrastructure or facilities.
 (2) The municipalities may by agreement share tax revenues and fees remitted to municipalities
 located within the joint municipal zone.
 (619.2 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u621s
 Section 621. Prohibiting the Location of Methadone Treatment Facilities in Certain Locations.--(a)
 (1) Notwithstanding any
 other provision of law to the contrary and except as provided in subsection (b), a
 methadone treatment facility shall not be established or operated within 500 feet
 of an existing school, public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care
 facility, church, meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious
 worship established prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility.
 (2) The provisions of this subsection shall apply whether or not an occupancy permit or
 certificate of use has been issued to the owner or operator of a methadone treatment
 facility for a location that is within 500 feet of an existing school, public playground,
 public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or
 other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the
 proposed methadone treatment facility.
 (b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), a methadone treatment facility may be established
 and operated closer than 500 feet to an existing school, public playground, public
 park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church, meetinghouse or other
 actual place of regularly stated religious worship established prior to the proposed
 methadone treatment facility if, by majority vote, the governing body for the municipality
 in which the proposed methadone treatment facility is to be located votes in favor
 of the issuance of an occupancy permit or certificate of use for said facility at
 such a location. At least 14 days prior to the governing body of a municipality voting
 on whether to approve the issuance of an occupancy permit or certificate of use for
 a methadone treatment facility at a location that is closer than 500 feet to a school,
 public playground, public park, residential housing area, child-care facility, church,
 meetinghouse or other actual place of regularly stated religious worship established
 prior to the proposed methadone treatment facility, one or more public hearings regarding
 the proposed methadone treatment facility location shall be held within the municipality
 following public notice. All owners of real property located within 500 feet of the
 proposed location shall be provided written notice of said public hearings at least
 30 days prior to said public hearings occurring.
 (c) This section shall not apply to a methadone treatment facility that is licensed by
 the Department of Health prior to May 15, 1999.
 (d) As used in this section, the term "methadone treatment facility" shall mean a facility
 licensed by the Department of Health to use the drug methadone in the treatment, maintenance
 or detoxification of persons.
 (621 added June 18, 1999, P.L.70, No.10)
 19680247u701h
 ARTICLE VII
 Planned Residential Development
 19680247u701s
 Section 701. Purposes.--In order that the purposes of this act be furthered in an era of increasing
 urbanization and of growing demand for housing of all types and design; to insure
 that the provisions of Article VI which are concerned in part with the uniform treatment
 of dwelling type, bulk, density, intensity and open space within each zoning district,
 shall not be applied to the improvement of land by other than lot by lot development
 in a manner that would distort the objectives of that Article VI; to encourage innovations
 in residential and nonresidential development and renewal so that the growing demand
 for housing and other development may be met by greater variety in type, design and
 layout of dwellings and other buildings and structures and by the conservation and
 more efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings and uses; so that greater
 opportunities for better housing and recreation may extend to all citizens and residents
 of this Commonwealth; and in order to encourage a more efficient use of land and of
 public services and to reflect changes in the technology of land development so that
 economies secured may enure to the benefit of those who need homes and for other uses;
 and, in aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate the type, design
 and layout of residential and nonresidential development to the particular site and
 the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development in a manner
 consistent with the preservation of the property values within existing residential
 and nonresidential areas, and to insure that the increased flexibility of regulations
 over land development authorized herein is carried out under such administrative standards
 and procedures as shall encourage the disposition of proposals for land development
 without undue delay, the following powers are granted to all municipalities.
 19680247u702s
 Section 702. Grant of Power.--The governing body of each municipality may enact, amend and repeal
 provisions within a zoning ordinance fixing standards and conditions for planned residential
 development. The enactment of such provisions shall be in accordance with the procedures
 required for the enactment of an amendment of a zoning ordinance as provided in Article
 VI of this act. Pursuant to such provisions the governing body may approve, modify
 or disapprove any development plan within the municipality adopting such provisions
 or designate the planning agency as its official agency for such purposes. Such provisions
 shall:
 (1) Specify whether the governing body, or the planning agency shall administer planned
 residential development provisions pursuant to the provisions of this article;
 (2) Set forth the standards, conditions and regulations for a planned residential development
 consistent with the provisions of this article; and
 (3) Set forth the procedures pertaining to the application for, hearing on and tentative
 and final approval of a planned residential development, which shall be consistent
 with the provisions of this article for such applications and hearings.
 19680247u702.1s
 Section 702.1. Transferable Development Rights.--Municipalities electing to enact planned residential
 development provisions may also incorporate therein provisions for transferable development
 rights, on a voluntary basis, in accordance with express standards and criteria set
 forth in the ordinance and with the requirements of Article VI.
 19680247u703s
 Section 703. Applicability of Comprehensive Plan and Statement of Community Development Objectives.--All
 provisions and all amendments thereto adopted pursuant to this article shall be based
 on and interpreted in relation to the statement of community development objectives
 of the zoning ordinance and may be related to either the comprehensive plan for the
 development of the municipality prepared under the provisions of this act or a statement
 of legislative findings in accordance with section 606. Every application for approval
 of a planned residential development either shall be based on and interpreted in relation
 to the statement of community development objectives, and may be related to the comprehensive
 plan, or shall be based on and interpreted in relation to the statement of legislative
 findings.
 19680247u704s
 Section 704. Jurisdiction of County Planning Agencies.--(a) When any county has adopted planned residential development provisions in accordance
 with the terms of this article, a certified copy of such provisions shall be sent
 to every municipality within the county. All amendments shall also be sent to the
 aforementioned municipalities.
 (b) The powers of governing bodies of counties to enact, amend and repeal planned residential
 development provisions shall not supersede any local planned residential development,
 zoning or subdivision and land development ordinance which is already in effect or
 subsequently becomes effective in any municipality within such county, provided that
 a certified copy of such provision is filed with the county planning agency, if one
 exists. However, all applications for tentative approval of planned residential development
 of land located within a municipality having adopted planned residential development
 provisions as set forth in this article shall nevertheless be referred to the county
 planning agency, if one exists, for study and recommendation and such county planning
 agency shall be required to report to such municipality within 30 days or forfeit
 the right to review.
 19680247u705s
 Section 705. Standards and Conditions for Planned Residential Development.--(a) All provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall set forth all the standards,
 conditions and regulations by which a proposed planned residential development shall
 be evaluated, and said standards, conditions and regulations shall be consistent with
 the following subsections.
 (b) The provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall set forth the uses permitted
 in a planned residential development, which uses may include but shall not be limited
 to:
 (1) Dwelling units of any dwelling type or configuration, or any combination thereof.
 (2) Those nonresidential uses deemed to be appropriate for incorporation in the design
 of the planned residential development.
 (c) The provisions may establish regulations setting forth the timing of development among
 the various types of dwellings and may specify whether some or all nonresidential
 uses are to be built before, after or at the same time as the residential uses.
 (d) The provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall establish standards governing
 the density, or intensity of land use, in a planned residential development. The standards
 may vary the density or intensity of land use, otherwise applicable to the land under
 the provisions of a zoning ordinance of the municipality within the planned residential
 development in consideration of all of the following:
 (1) The amount, location and proposed use of common open space.
 (2) The location and physical characteristics of the site of the proposed planned residential
 development.
 (3) The location, design, type and use of structures proposed.
 (e) In the case of a planned residential development proposed to be developed over a period
 of years, standards established in provisions adopted pursuant to this article may,
 to encourage the flexibility of housing density, design and type intended by this
 article:
 (1) Permit a variation in each section to be developed from the density, or intensity
 of use, established for the entire planned residential development.
 (2) Allow for a greater concentration of density or intensity of land use, within some
 section or sections of development, whether it be earlier or later in the development
 than upon others.
 (3) Require that the approval of such greater concentration of density or intensity of
 land use for any section to be developed be offset by a smaller concentration in any
 completed prior stage or by an appropriate reservation of common open space on the
 remaining land by a grant of easement or by covenant in favor of the municipality,
 provided that such reservation shall, as far as practicable, defer the precise location
 of such common open space until an application for final approval is filed, so that
 flexibility of development which is a prime objective of this article, can be maintained.
 (f) The standards for a planned residential development established by provisions adopted
 pursuant to this article may require that the common open space resulting from the
 application of standards for density, or intensity of land use, shall be set aside
 for the use and benefit of the residents in such development and may include provisions
 which shall determine the amount and location of said common open space and secure
 its improvement and maintenance for common open space use, subject, however, to the
 following:
 (1) The municipality may, at any time and from time to time, accept the dedication of
 land or any interest therein for public use and maintenance, but the municipality
 need not require, as a condition of the approval of a planned residential development,
 that land proposed to be set aside for common open space be dedicated or made available
 to public use. The provisions may require that the landowner provide for and establish
 an organization for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space, and that
 such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the common open space,
 by sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and established to own and
 maintain the common open space), without first offering to dedicate the same to the
 public.
 (2) In the event that the organization established to own and maintain common open space,
 or any successor organization, shall at any time after establishment of the planned
 residential development fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order
 and condition in accordance with the development plan, the municipality may serve
 written notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the planned residential
 development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain
 the common open space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand
 that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof, and shall
 state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days of
 the notice. At such hearing the municipality may modify the terms of the original
 notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which they
 shall be corrected.
 (3) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modifications thereof
 shall not be corrected within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the municipality,
 in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the planned residential
 development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance,
 may enter upon said common open space and maintain the same for a period of one year.
 Said maintenance by the municipality shall not constitute a taking of said common
 open space, nor vest in the public any rights to use the same.
 (4) Before the expiration of said year, the municipality shall, upon its initiative or
 upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of
 the common open space, call a public hearing upon notice to such organization, or
 to the residents of the planned residential development, to be held by the governing
 body or its designated agency, at which hearing such organization or the residents
 of the planned residential development shall show cause why such maintenance by the
 municipality shall not, at the option of the municipality, continue for a succeeding
 year. If the governing body, or its designated agency, shall determine that such organization
 is ready and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable condition, the
 municipality shall cease to maintain said common open space at the end of said year.
 If the governing body or its designated agency shall determine that such organization
 is not ready and able to maintain said common open space in a reasonable condition,
 the municipality may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said common open space
 during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination,
 in each year thereafter.
 (5) The decision of the governing body or its designated agency shall be subject to appeal
 to court in the same manner, and within the same time limitation, as is provided for
 zoning appeals by this act.
 (6) The cost of such maintenance by the municipality shall be assessed ratably against
 the properties within the planned residential development that have a right of enjoyment
 of the common open space, and shall become a lien on said properties. The municipality
 at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose of maintenance
 shall file a notice of lien in the office of the prothonotary of the county, upon
 the properties affected by the lien within the planned residential development.
 (g) Provisions adopted pursuant to this article may require that a planned residential
 development contain a minimum number of dwelling units.
 (h) The authority granted a municipality by Article V to establish standards for the location,
 width, course and surfacing of streets, walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, shade
 trees, water, sewage and drainage facilities, easements or rights-of-way for drainage
 and utilities, reservations of public grounds, other improvements, regulations for
 the height and setback as they relate to renewable energy systems and energy-conserving
 building design, regulations for the height and location of vegetation with respect
 to boundary lines, as they relate to renewable energy systems and energy-conserving
 building design, regulations for the type and location of renewable energy systems
 or their components and regulations for the design and construction of structures
 to encourage the use of renewable energy systems, shall be vested in the governing
 body or the planning agency for the purposes of this article. The standards applicable
 to a particular planned residential development may be different than or modifications
 of, the standards and requirements otherwise required of subdivisions authorized under
 an ordinance adopted pursuant to Article V, provided, however, that provisions adopted
 pursuant to this article shall set forth the limits and extent of any modifications
 or changes in such standards and requirements in order that a landowner shall know
 the limits and extent of permissible modifications from the standards otherwise applicable
 to subdivisions.
 (i) The provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall set forth the standards and
 criteria by which the design, bulk and location of buildings shall be evaluated, and
 all such standards and criteria for any feature of a planned residential development
 shall be set forth in such provisions with sufficient certainty to provide reasonable
 criteria by which specific proposals for a planned residential development can be
 evaluated. All standards in such provisions shall not unreasonably restrict the ability
 of the landowner to relate his development plan to the particular site and to the
 particular demand for housing existing at the time of development.
 (j) Provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall include a requirement that, if water
 is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned and maintained by the
 individual owners of lots within the planned residential development, applicants shall
 present evidence to the governing body or planning agency, as the case may be, that
 the planned residential development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility,
 a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation,
 authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania
 Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement,
 or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
 shall be acceptable evidence.
 19680247u706s
 Section 706. Enforcement and Modification of Provisions of the Plan.--To further the mutual interest
 of the residents of the planned residential development and of the public in the preservation
 of the integrity of the development plan, as finally approved, and to insure that
 modifications, if any, in the development plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance
 of the said residents upon the provisions of the development plan, nor result in changes
 that would adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification
 of the provisions of the development plan as finally approved, whether those are recorded
 by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise shall be subject to the following provisions:
 (1) The provisions of the development plan relating to:
 (i) the use, bulk and location of buildings and structures;
 (ii) the quantity and location of common open space, except as otherwise provided in this
 article; and
 (iii) the intensity of use or the density of residential units;
 shall run in favor of the municipality and shall be enforceable in law or in equity
 by the municipality, without limitation on any powers of regulation otherwise granted
 the municipality by law.
 (2) All provisions of the development plan shall run in favor of the residents of the
 planned residential development but only to the extent expressly provided in the development
 plan and in accordance with the terms of the development plan, and to that extent
 said provisions, whether recorded by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, may be
 enforced at law or equity by said residents acting individually, jointly, or through
 an organization designated in the development plan to act on their behalf; provided,
 however, that no provisions of the development plan shall be implied to exist in favor
 of residents of the planned residential development except as to those portions of
 the development plan which have been finally approved and have been recorded.
 (3) All those provisions of the development plan authorized to be enforced by the municipality
 under this section may be modified, removed, or released by the municipality, except
 grants or easements relating to the service or equipment of a public utility, subject
 to the following conditions:
 (i) No such modification, removal or release of the provisions of the development plan
 by the municipality shall affect the rights of the residents of the planned residential
 development to maintain and enforce those provisions, at law or equity, as provided
 in this section.
 (ii) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the development plan by the
 municipality shall be permitted except upon a finding by the governing body or the
 planning agency, following a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice called
 and held in accordance with the provisions of this article, that the same is consistent
 with the efficient development and preservation of the entire planned residential
 development, does not adversely affect either the enjoyment of land abutting upon
 or across the street from the planned residential development or the public interest,
 and is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon any person.
 (4) Residents of the planned residential development may, to the extent and in the manner
 expressly authorized by the provisions of the development plan, modify, remove or
 release their rights to enforce the provisions of the development plan but no such
 action shall affect the right of the municipality to enforce the provisions of the
 development plan in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 19680247u707s
 Section 707. Application for Tentative Approval of Planned Residential Development.--In order to
 provide an expeditious method for processing a development plan for a planned residential
 development under the provisions adopted pursuant to the powers granted herein, and
 to avoid the delay and uncertainty which would arise if it were necessary to secure
 approval, by a multiplicity of local procedures, of a plat of subdivision as well
 as approval of a change in the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the property,
 it is hereby declared to be in the public interest that all procedures with respect
 to the approval or disapproval of a development plan for a planned residential development
 and the continuing administration thereof shall be consistent with the following provisions:
 (1) An application for tentative approval of the development plan for a planned residential
 development shall be filed by or on behalf of the landowner.
 (2) The application for tentative approval shall be filed by the landowner in such form,
 upon the payment of such a reasonable fee and with such officials of the municipality
 as shall be designated in the provisions adopted pursuant to this article.
 (3) All planning, zoning and subdivision matters relating to the platting, use and development
 of the planned residential development and subsequent modifications of the regulations
 relating thereto, to the extent such modification is vested in the municipality, shall
 be determined and established by the governing body or the planning agency.
 (4) The provisions shall require only such information in the application as is reasonably
 necessary to disclose to the governing body or the planning agency:
 (i) the location, size and topography of the site and the nature of the landowner's interest
 in the land proposed to be developed;
 (ii) the density of land use to be allocated to parts of the site to be developed;
 (iii) the location and size of the common open space and the form of organization proposed
 to own and maintain the common open space;
 (iv) the use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings and other structures;
 (v) the feasibility of proposals for water supply and the disposition of sanitary waste
 and storm water;
 (vi) the substance of covenants, grants of easements or other restrictions proposed to
 be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures including proposed easements
 or grants for public utilities;
 (vii) the provisions for parking of vehicles and the location and width of proposed streets
 and public ways;
 (viii) the required modifications in the municipal land use regulations otherwise applicable
 to the subject property;
 (viii.1) the feasibility of proposals for energy conservation and the effective utilization
 of renewable energy sources; and
 (ix) in the case of development plans which call for development over a period of years,
 a schedule showing the proposed times within which applications for final approval
 of all sections of the planned residential development are intended to be filed and
 this schedule must be updated annually, on the anniversary of its approval, until
 the development is completed and accepted.
 (5) The application for tentative approval of a planned residential development shall
 include a written statement by the landowner setting forth the reasons why, in his
 opinion, a planned residential development would be in the public interest and would
 be consistent with the comprehensive plan for the development of the municipality.
 (6) The application for and tentative and final approval of a development plan for a planned
 residential development prescribed in this article shall be in lieu of all other procedures
 or approvals, otherwise required pursuant to Articles V and VI of this act.
 19680247u708s
 Section 708. Public Hearings.--(a) Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of a planned
 residential development pursuant to this article, a public hearing pursuant to public
 notice on said application shall be held by the governing body or the planning agency,
 if designated, in the manner prescribed in Article IX.
 (b) The governing body or the planning agency may continue the hearing from time to time,
 and where applicable, may refer the matter back to the planning agency for a report,
 provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings shall be concluded
 within 60 days after the date of the first public hearing.
 (c) The municipality may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing proceedings
 authorized by this section and by subsequent sections in this article prior to final
 approval by the governing body. In exercising such an option, the municipality and
 mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and follow the procedures set forth
 in Article IX.
 19680247u709s
 Section 709. The Findings.--(a) The governing body, or the planning agency, within 60 days following the conclusion
 of the public hearing provided for in this article or within 180 days after the date
 of filing of the application, whichever occurs first, shall, by official written communication,
 to the landowner, either:
 (1) grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
 (2) grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not included in the development
 plan as submitted; or
 (3) deny tentative approval to the development plan.
 Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative approval
 of the development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that tentative approval
 is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving
 a copy of the official written communication of the governing body notify such governing
 body of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case, the governing body
 shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan. In the
 event the landowner does not, within said period, notify the governing body of his
 refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan,
 with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
 ((a) amended Jan.1, 2002, P.L.13, No.2)
 (b) The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written communication shall
 include not only conclusions but also findings of fact related to the specific proposal
 and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for
 the denial, and said communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects
 the development plan would or would not be in the public interest, including, but
 not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions on the following:
 (1) in those respects in which the development plan is or is not consistent with the comprehensive
 plan for the development of the municipality;
 (2) the extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and subdivision regulations
 otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not limited to density,
 bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
 public interest;
 (3) the purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the planned residential
 development, the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of
 the common open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of
 the common open space as related to the proposed density and type of residential development;
 (4) the physical design of the development plan and the manner in which said design does
 or does not make adequate provision for public services, provide adequate control
 over vehicular traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and
 visual enjoyment;
 (5) the relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned residential development
 to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established; and
 (6) in the case of a development plan which proposes development over a period of years,
 the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the
 public and of the residents of the planned residential development in the integrity
 of the development plan.
 (c) In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with or without conditions,
 the governing body may set forth in the official written communication the time within
 which an application for final approval of the development plan shall be filed or,
 in the case of a development plan which provides for development over a period of
 years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of each part
 thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time so established
 between grant of tentative approval and an application for final approval shall not
 be less than three months and, in the case of developments over a period of years,
 the time between applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be not
 less than 12 months.
 19680247u710s
 Section 710. Status of Plan After Tentative Approval.--(a) The official written communication provided for in this article shall be certified
 by the municipal secretary or clerk of the governing body and shall be filed in his
 office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative approval
 has been granted, it shall be deemed an amendment to the zoning map, effective upon
 final approval, and shall be noted on the zoning map.
 (b) Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the planned residential
 development for recording nor authorize development or the issuance of any building
 permits. A development plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted,
 or which has been given tentative approval with conditions which have been accepted
 by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any
 of the conditions of the tentative approval), shall not be modified or revoked nor
 otherwise impaired by action of the municipality pending an application or applications
 for final approval, without the consent of the landowner, provided an application
 or applications for final approval is filed or, in the case of development over a
 period of years, provided applications are filed, within the periods of time specified
 in the official written communication granting tentative approval.
 (c) In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and thereafter, but
 prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to abandon said development plan
 and shall so notify the governing body in writing, or in the event the landowner shall
 fail to file application or applications for final approval within the required period
 of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall be deemed to be
 revoked and all that portion of the area included in the development plan for which
 final approval has not been given shall be subject to those local ordinances otherwise
 applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and the same shall be
 noted on the zoning map and in the records of the municipal secretary or clerk of
 the municipality.
 19680247u711s
 Section 711. Application for Final Approval.--(a) An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a development
 plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, for a section thereof.
 Said application shall be made to the official of the municipality designated by the
 ordinance and within the time or times specified by the official written communication
 granting tentative approval. The application shall include any drawings, specifications,
 covenants, easements, performance bond and such other requirements as may be specified
 by ordinance, as well as any conditions set forth in the official written communication
 at the time of tentative approval. A public hearing on an application for final approval
 of the development plan, or part thereof, shall not be required provided the development
 plan, or the part thereof, submitted for final approval, is in compliance with the
 development plan theretofore given tentative approval and with any specified conditions
 attached thereto.
 (b) In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together with all
 drawings, specifications and other documents in support thereof, and as required by
 the ordinance and the official written communication of tentative approval, the municipality
 shall, within 45 days from the date of the regular meeting of the governing body or
 the planning agency, whichever first reviews the application next following the date
 the application is filed, grant such development plan final approval, provided, however,
 that should the next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing
 of the application, the 45-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following
 the day the application has been filed. ((b) amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (c) In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations from the development
 plan given tentative approval, the approving body may refuse to grant final approval
 and shall, within 45 days from the date of the regular meeting of the governing body
 or the planning agency, whichever first reviews the application next following the
 date the application is filed, so advise the landowner in writing of said refusal,
 setting forth in said notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are not
 in the public interest, provided, however, that should the next regular meeting occur
 more than 30 days following the filing of the application, the 45-day period shall
 be measured from the 30th day following the day the application has been filed. In
 the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
 (1) refile his application for final approval without the variations objected; or
 (2) file a written request with the approving body that it hold a public hearing on his
 application for final approval.
 If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may do so at any time
 within which he shall be entitled to apply for final approval, or within 30 additional
 days if the time for applying for final approval shall have already passed at the
 time when the landowner was advised that the development plan was not in substantial
 compliance. In the event the landowner shall fail to take either of these alternate
 actions within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the development plan.
 Any such public hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after
 request for the hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing shall be conducted
 in the manner prescribed in this article for public hearings on applications for tentative
 approval. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the approving body shall
 by official written communication either grant final approval to the development plan
 or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the development plan
 shall, in cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the findings
 required for an application for tentative approval set forth in this article. Failure
 of the governing body or agency to render a decision on an application for final approval
 and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required by
 this section shall be deemed an approval of the application for final approval, as
 presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change
 in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in which
 case failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication
 shall have like effect.
 ((c) amended June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (d) A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final approval shall
 be so certified without delay by the approving body and shall be filed of record forthwith
 in the office of the recorder of deeds before any development shall take place in
 accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan the zoning
 and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan
 shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion, in accordance with the time provisions
 stated in section 508, of said planned residential development or of that part thereof,
 as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions
 of said development plan, or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except
 with the consent of the landowner. Upon approval of a final plat, the developer shall
 record the plat in accordance with the provisions of section 513(a) and post financial
 security in accordance with section 509.
 (e) In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given final approval
 and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such plan or the section thereof that has
 been finally approved, and shall so notify the approving body in writing; or, in the
 event the landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the planned residential development
 in accordance with the time provisions stated in section 508 after final approval
 has been granted, no development or further development shall take place on the property
 included in the development plan until after the said property is reclassified by
 enactment of an amendment to the municipal zoning ordinance in the manner prescribed
 for such amendments in Article VI.
 (f) Each month a municipality shall notify in writing the superintendent of a school district
 in which development plans for a planned residential development were finally approved
 by the municipality during the preceding month. The notice shall include, but not
 be limited to, the location of the development, the number and types of units to be
 included in the development and the expected construction schedule of the development.
 ((f) added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u712.1s
 Section 712.1. Jurisdiction.--District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
 brought under section 712.2.
 19680247u712.1v
 Compiler's Note: Section 28 of Act 207 of 2004 provided that any and all references in any other law
 to a "district justice" or "justice of the peace" shall be deemed to be references
 to a magisterial district judge.
 19680247u712.2s
 Section 712.2. Enforcement Remedies.--(a) Any person, partnership or corporation, who or which has violated the planned residential
 development provisions of any ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling laws
 shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
 by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
 reasonable attorney fees incurred by a municipality as a result thereof. No judgment
 shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination
 of a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
 the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the appropriate
 rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
 violation, unless the district justice determining that there has been a violation
 further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
 corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation,
 in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
 fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice,
 and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
 All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of planned
 residential development provisions shall be paid over to the municipality whose ordinance
 has been violated.
 (b) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown,
 tolling the per diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
 (c) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any
 person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any action for
 enforcement pursuant to this section.
 19680247u712.2v
 Compiler's Note: Section 28 of Act 207 of 2004 provided that any and all references in any other law
 to a "district justice" or "justice of the peace" shall be deemed to be references
 to a magisterial district judge.
 19680247u713s
 Section 713. Compliance by Municipalities.--Municipalities with planned residential development
 ordinances shall have five years from the effective date of this amendatory act to
 comply with the provisions of this article.
 19680247u701-Ah
 ARTICLE VII-A
 Traditional Neighborhood Development
 (Art. added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u701-As
 Section 701-A. Purposes and Objectives.--(a) This article grants powers to municipalities for the following purposes:
 (1) to insure that the provisions of Article VI which are concerned in part with the uniform
 treatment of dwelling type, bulk, density, intensity and open space within each zoning
 district shall not be applied to the improvement of land by other than lot by lot
 development in a manner that would distort the objectives of Article VI;
 (2) to encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential development and renewal
 which makes use of a mixed-use form of development so that the growing demand for
 housing and other development may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout
 of dwellings and other buildings and structures and by the conservation and more efficient
 use of open space ancillary to said dwellings and uses;
 (3) to extend greater opportunities for better housing, recreation and access to goods,
 services and employment opportunities to all citizens and residents of this Commonwealth;
 (4) to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services to reflect changes
 in the technology of land development so that economies secured may benefit those
 who need homes and for other uses;
 (5) to allow for the development of fully integrated, mixed-use pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods;
 (6) to minimize traffic congestion, infrastructure costs and environmental degradation;
 (7) to promote the implementation of the objectives of the municipal or multimunicipal
 comprehensive plan for guiding the location for growth;
 (8) to provide a procedure in aid of these purposes which can relate the type, design
 and layout of residential and nonresidential development to the particular site and
 the particular demand for housing existing at the time of development in a manner
 consistent with the preservation of the property values within existing residential
 and nonresidential areas; and
 (9) to insure that the increased flexibility of regulations over land development authorized
 herein is carried out under such administrative standards and procedure as shall encourage
 the disposition of proposals for land development without undue delay.
 (b) The objectives of a traditional neighborhood development are:
 (1) to establish a community which is pedestrian-oriented with a number of parks, a centrally
 located public commons, square, plaza, park or prominent intersection of two or more
 major streets, commercial enterprises and civic and other public buildings and facilities
 for social activity, recreation and community functions;
 (2) to minimize traffic congestion and reduce the need for extensive road construction
 by reducing the number and length of automobile trips required to access everyday
 needs;
 (3) to make public transit a viable alternative to the automobile by organizing appropriate
 building densities;
 (4) to provide the elderly and the young with independence of movement by locating most
 daily activities within walking distance;
 (5) to foster the ability of citizens to come to know each other and to watch over their
 mutual security by providing public spaces such as streets, parks and squares and
 mixed use which maximizes the proximity to neighbors at almost all times of the day;
 (6) to foster a sense of place and community by providing a setting that encourages the
 natural intermingling of everyday uses and activities within a recognizable neighborhood;
 (7) to integrate age and income groups and foster the bonds of an authentic community
 by providing a range of housing types, shops and workplaces; and
 (8) to encourage community-oriented initiatives and to support the balanced development
 of society by providing suitable civic and public buildings and facilities.
 (701-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u702-As
 Section 702-A. Grant of Power.--The governing body of each municipality may enact, amend and repeal
 provisions of a zoning ordinance in order to fix standards and conditions for traditional
 neighborhood development. The provisions for standards and conditions for traditional
 neighborhood development shall be, except as otherwise provided in this article, consistent
 with Article VI and shall be included within the zoning ordinance, and the enactment
 of the traditional neighborhood development provisions shall be in accordance with
 the procedures required for the enactment of an amendment of a zoning ordinance as
 provided in Article VI. The provisions shall:
 (1) Set forth the standards, conditions and regulations for a traditional neighborhood
 development consistent with this article. A zoning ordinance or amendment may authorize
 and provide standards, conditions and regulations for traditional neighborhood development
 that:
 (i) designate a part or parts of the municipality as a district or districts which are
 reserved exclusively for traditional neighborhood development; or
 (ii) permit the creation of a traditional neighborhood development in any part of the municipality
 or in one or more specified zoning districts.
 (2) Set forth the procedures pertaining to the application for, hearing on and preliminary
 and final approval of a traditional neighborhood development which shall be consistent
 with this article for those applications and hearings.
 (702-A amended Nov. 23, 2010, P.L.1101, No.111)
 19680247u703-As
 Section 703-A. Transferable Development Rights.--Municipalities electing to enact traditional neighborhood
 development provisions may also incorporate provisions for transferable development
 rights on a voluntary basis in accordance with express standards and criteria set
 forth in the ordinance and with the requirements of Article VI.
 (703-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u704-As
 Section 704-A. Applicability of Comprehensive Plan and Statement of Community Development Objectives.--All
 provisions and all amendments to the provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall
 be based on and interpreted in relation to the statement of community development
 objectives of the zoning ordinance and shall be consistent with either the comprehensive
 plan of the municipality or the statement of community development objectives in accordance
 with section 606. Every application for the approval of a traditional neighborhood
 development shall be based on and interpreted in relation to the statement of community
 development objectives and shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan.
 (704-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u705-As
 Section 705-A. Forms of Traditional Neighborhood Development.--A traditional neighborhood development
 may be developed and applied in any of the following forms.
 (1) As a new development.
 (2) As an outgrowth or extension of existing development.
 (3) As a form of urban infill where existing uses and structures may be incorporated into
 the development.
 (4) In any combination or variation of the above.
 (705-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u706-As
 Section 706-A. Standards and Conditions for Traditional Neighborhood Development.--(a) All provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall set forth all the standards,
 conditions and regulations by which a proposed traditional neighborhood development
 shall be evaluated, and those standards, conditions and regulations shall be consistent
 with the following subsections.
 (b) The provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall set forth the uses permitted
 in traditional neighborhood development, which uses may include, but shall not be
 limited to:
 (1) Dwelling units of any dwelling type or configuration or any combination thereof.
 (2) Those nonresidential uses deemed to be appropriate for incorporation in the design
 of the traditional neighborhood development.
 (c) The provisions may establish regulations setting forth the timing of development among
 the various types of dwellings and may specify whether some or all nonresidential
 uses are to be built before, after or at the same time as the residential uses.
 (d) The provisions adopted pursuant to this article shall establish standards governing
 the density or intensity of land use in a traditional neighborhood development. The
 standards may vary the density or intensity of land use otherwise applicable to the
 land under the provisions of a zoning ordinance of the municipality within the traditional
 neighborhood development. It is recommended that the provisions adopted by the municipality
 pursuant to this article include, but not be limited to, all of the following:
 (1) The amount, location and proposed use of common open space, providing for parks to
 be distributed throughout the neighborhood as well as the establishment of a centrally
 located public commons, square, park, plaza or prominent intersection of two or more
 major streets.
 (2) The location and physical characteristics of the site of the proposed traditional
 neighborhood development, providing for the retaining and enhancing, where practicable,
 of natural features such as wetlands, ponds, lakes, waterways, trees of high quality,
 significant tree stands and other significant natural features. These significant
 natural features should be at least partially fronted by public tracts whenever possible.
 (3) The location and physical characteristics of the site of the proposed traditional
 neighborhood development so that it will develop out of the location of squares, parks
 and other neighborhood centers and subcenters. Zoning changes in building type should
 generally occur at mid-block rather than mid-street, and buildings should tend to
 be zoned by compatibility of building type rather than building use. The proposed
 traditional neighborhood development should be designed to work with the topography
 of the site to minimize the amount of grading necessary to achieve a street network,
 and some significant high points of the site should be set aside for public tracts
 for the location of public buildings or other public facilities.
 (4) The location, design, type and use of structures proposed, with most structures being
 placed close to the street at generally the equivalent of one-quarter the width of
 the lot or less. The distance between the sidewalk and residential dwellings should,
 as a general rule, be occupied by a semipublic attachment such as a porch or, at a
 minimum, a covered entryway.
 (5) The location, design, type and use of streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public
 rights-of-way with a hierarchy of streets laid out with an interconnected network of streets and blocks that provide multiple routes from origins to destinations and
 are appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles equally.
 As such, most streets, except alleys, should have sidewalks.
 (6) The location for vehicular parking with the street plan providing for on-street parking
 for most streets, with the exception of alleys. All parking lots, except where there
 is a compelling reason to the contrary, should be located either behind or to the
 side of buildings and in most cases should be located toward the center of blocks
 such that only their access is visible from adjacent streets. In most cases, structures
 located on lots smaller than 50 feet in width should be served by a rear alley with
 all garages fronting on alleys. Garages not served by an alley should be set back
 from the front of the house or rotated so that the garage doors do not face any adjacent
 streets.
 (7) The minimum and maximum areas and dimensions of the properties and common open space
 within the proposed traditional neighborhood development and the approximate distance
 from the center to the edge of the traditional neighborhood development. It is recommended
 that the distance from the center to the edge of the traditional neighborhood development
 be approximately one-quarter mile or less and not more than one-half mile. Traditional
 neighborhood developments in excess of one-half mile distance from center to edge
 should be divided into two or more developments.
 (8) The site plan to provide for either a natural or man-made corridor to serve as the
 edge of the neighborhood. When standing alone, the traditional neighborhood development
 should front on open space to serve as its edge. Such open space may include, but
 is not limited to, parks, a golf course, cemetery, farmland or natural settings such
 as woodlands or waterways. When adjacent to existing development, the traditional
 neighborhood development should either front on open space, a street or roadway or
 any combination hereof.
 (9) The greatest density of housing and the preponderance of office and commercial uses
 should be located to anchor the traditional neighborhood development. If the neighborhood is adjacent to existing development or a major roadway then office,
 commercial and denser residential uses may be located at either the edge or the center,
 or both. Commercial uses located at the edge of the traditional neighborhood development
 may be located adjacent to similar commercial uses in order to form a greater commercial
 corridor.
 ((d) amended Nov. 23, 2010, P.L.1101, No.111)
 (e) In the case of a traditional neighborhood development proposed to be developed over
 a period of years, standards established in provisions adopted pursuant to this article
 may, to encourage the flexibility of housing density, design and type intended by
 this article:
 (1) Permit a variation in each section to be developed from the density or intensity of
 use established for the entire traditional neighborhood development.
 (2) Allow for a greater concentration of density or intensity of land use within some
 section or sections of development, whether it be earlier or later in the development
 than upon others.
 (3) Require that the approval of such greater concentration of density or intensity of
 land use for any section to be developed be offset by a smaller concentration in any
 completed prior stage or by an appropriate reservation of common open space on the
 remaining land by a grant of easement or by covenant in favor of the municipality,
 provided that the reservation shall as far as practicable defer the precise location
 of such common open space until an application for final approval is filed so that
 flexibility of development which is a prime objective of this article can be maintained.
 (f) Provisions adopted pursuant to this article may require that a traditional neighborhood
 development contain a minimum number of dwelling units and a minimum number of nonresidential
 units.
 (g) (1) The authority granted a municipality by Article V to establish standards for the location,
 width, course and surfacing of streets, walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, shade
 trees, water, sewage and drainage facilities, easements or rights-of-way for drainage
 and utilities, reservations of public grounds, other improvements, regulations for
 the height and setback as they relate to renewable energy systems and energy-conserving
 building design, regulations for the height and location of vegetation with respect
 to boundary lines, as they relate to renewable energy systems and energy-conserving
 building design, regulations for the type and location of renewable energy systems
 or their components and regulations for the design and construction of structures
 to encourage the use of renewable energy systems, shall be vested in the governing
 body or the planning agency for the purposes of this article.
 (2) The standards applicable to a particular traditional neighborhood development may
 be different than or modifications of the standards and requirements otherwise required
 of subdivisions or land development authorized under an ordinance adopted pursuant
 to Article V, provided, however, that provisions adopted pursuant to this article
 shall set forth the limits and extent of any modifications or changes in such standards
 and requirements in order that a landowner shall know the limits and extent of permissible
 modifications from the standards otherwise applicable to subdivisions or land development.
 (706-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u707-As
 Section 707-A. Sketch Plan Presentation.--The municipality may informally meet with a landowner to
 informally discuss the conceptual aspects of the landowner's development plan prior
 to the filing of the application for preliminary approval for the development plan.
 The landowner may present a sketch plan to the municipality for discussion purposes
 only, and during the discussion the municipality may make suggestions and recommendations
 on the design of the developmental plan which shall not be binding on the municipality.
 (707-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u708-As
 Section 708-A. Manual of Written and Graphic Design Guidelines.--Where it has adopted provisions
 for traditional neighborhood development, the governing body of a municipality may
 also provide, upon review and recommendation of the planning commission where one
 exists, a manual of written and graphic design guidelines. The manual may be included
 in or amended into the subdivision and land development ordinance, the zoning ordinance
 or both.
 (708-A amended Nov. 23, 2010, P.L.1101, No.111)
 19680247u708.1-As
 Section 708.1-A. Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance Provisions Applicable to Traditional Neighborhood
 Development.--The municipality may enact subdivision and land development ordinance
 provisions applicable to a traditional neighborhood development to address the design
 standards that are appropriate to a traditional neighborhood development, including,
 but not limited to, compactness, pedestrian orientation, street geometry or other
 related design features. The provisions may be included as part of any ordinance pertaining
 to traditional neighborhood development and may be subject to modification similar
 to section 512.1.
 (708.1-A added Nov. 23, 2010, P.L.1101, No.111)
 19680247u709-As
 Section 709-A. Applicability of Article to Agriculture.--Zoning ordinances shall encourage the continuity,
 development and viability of agricultural operations. Zoning ordinances may not restrict
 agricultural operations or changes to or expansions of agricultural operations in
 geographic areas where agriculture has traditionally been present unless the agricultural
 operation will have a direct adverse effect on the public health and safety. Nothing
 in this section shall require a municipality to adopt a zoning ordinance that violates
 or exceeds the provisions of the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L.128, No.43), known as the
 "Agricultural Area Security Law," the act of June 10, 1982 (P.L.454, No.133), entitled
 "An act protecting agricultural operations from nuisance suits and ordinances under
 certain circumstances," and the act of May 20, 1993 (P.L.12, No.6), known as the "Nutrient
 Management Act."
 (709-A added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 19680247u801h
 ARTICLE VIII
 Zoning Challenges; General Provisions
 (Art. repealed June 1, 1972, P.L.333,
 No.93)
 19680247u801s
 Section 801. Landowner.--(801 repealed June 1, 1972, P.L.333, No.93)
 19680247u802s
 Section 802. Landowner; Scope of Judicial Relief.--(802 repealed June 1, 1972, P.L.333, No.93)
 19680247u801-Ah
 ARTICLE VIII-A
 Joint Municipal Zoning
 (Art. added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u801-As
 Section 801-A. General Powers.--(a) For the purpose of permitting municipalities which cooperatively plan for their future
 to also regulate future growth and change in a cooperative manner, the governing body
 of each municipality, in accordance with the conditions and procedures set forth in
 this act, may cooperate with one or more municipalities to enact, amend and repeal
 joint municipal zoning ordinances in order to implement joint municipal comprehensive
 plans and to accomplish any of the purposes of this act.
 (b) A joint municipal zoning ordinance shall be based upon an adopted joint municipal
 comprehensive plan and shall be prepared by a joint municipal planning commission
 established under the provisions of this act.
 (801-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u802-As
 Section 802-A. Relation to County and Municipal Zoning.--The enactment by any municipality of a joint
 municipal zoning ordinance whose land is subject to county or municipal zoning shall
 constitute an immediate repeal of the county or municipal zoning ordinance within
 the municipality adopting such ordinance as of the effective date of the joint municipal
 zoning ordinance.
 (802-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u803-As
 Section 803-A. Ordinance Provisions.--Joint municipal zoning ordinances may permit, prohibit, regulate,
 restrict and determine and may contain the same elements as authorized for municipal
 zoning ordinances by section 603.
 (803-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u804-As
 Section 804-A. Zoning Purposes.--The provisions of joint municipal zoning ordinances shall be designed
 to serve the same purposes for the area of its jurisdiction as is required by section
 604 for municipal zoning ordinances.
 (804-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u805-As
 Section 805-A. Classifications.--The authorizations and requirements of section 605 shall be applicable
 to joint municipal zoning ordinances. No area of a municipality party to a joint municipal
 zoning ordinance shall be left unzoned.
 (805-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u806-As
 Section 806-A. Statement of Community Development Objectives.--(a) Every joint municipal zoning ordinance shall contain a statement of community development
 objectives as defined by section 606.
 (b) The statement of community development objectives shall be based upon the joint municipal
 comprehensive plan and may be supplemented by a statement of legislative findings
 of the governing bodies party to the joint municipal zoning ordinance as defined by
 section 606.
 (c) The community development objectives for a joint municipal zoning ordinance shall
 relate to the area within the jurisdiction of the ordinance, shall identify the community
 development objectives of each municipality party to the joint municipal zoning ordinance
 and the relationship of these objectives to those of the area and shall, in addition,
 include the basis for the geographic delineation of the area which the ordinance regulates.
 (806-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u807-As
 Section 807-A. Preparation of Proposed Zoning Ordinance.--The requirements of section 607 as applicable
 to municipal zoning ordinances shall equally apply to the preparation of a joint municipal
 zoning ordinance except that:
 (1) The joint municipal planning commission shall assume the preparation responsibilities
 of the planning agency and shall be directed by the governing bodies of the participating
 municipalities.
 (2) At least one public meeting shall be held by the joint municipal planning commission
 within the area of jurisdiction of the proposed joint municipal zoning ordinance.
 (807-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u808-As
 Section 808-A. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance.--(a) The procedural requirements of section 608 shall be applicable to the enactment of
 a joint municipal zoning ordinance.
 (b) Each municipality party to a joint municipal zoning ordinance shall enact the ordinance
 and it shall not become effective until it has been properly enacted by all the participating
 municipalities.
 (c) No municipality may withdraw from or repeal a joint municipal zoning ordinance during
 the first three years following the date of its enactment. If, at any time after the
 end of the second year following the enactment of a joint municipal zoning ordinance,
 a municipality wishes to repeal and withdraw from a joint municipal zoning ordinance,
 it shall enact an ordinance, which shall be effective no sooner than one year after
 its enactment, repealing the joint municipal zoning ordinance and shall provide immediately
 and concurrently one year's advanced written notice of its repeal and withdrawal to
 the governing bodies of all municipalities party to the joint municipal zoning ordinance.
 The repeal and withdrawal may become effective within less than one year with the
 unanimous approval, by ordinance, of the governing bodies of all municipalities party
 to the joint municipal zoning ordinance.
 (808-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u809-As
 Section 809-A. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance Amendments.--(a) The procedural requirements for amendments to a joint municipal zoning ordinance shall
 be as required by section 609, except that all proposed amendments shall also be submitted
 to the joint municipal planning commission for review at least 30 days prior to the
 hearing on such proposed amendments.
 (b) The governing bodies of the other participating municipalities shall submit their
 comments, including a specific recommendation to adopt or not to adopt the proposed
 amendment, to the governing body of the municipality within which the amendment is
 proposed no later than the date of the public hearing. Failure to provide comments
 shall be construed as a recommendation to adopt the proposed amendments.
 (c) No amendments to the joint municipal zoning ordinance shall be effective unless all
 of the participating municipalities approve the amendment.
 (809-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u810-As
 Section 810-A. Procedure for Curative Amendments.--Curative amendments shall be filed in accordance
 with the requirements of section 609.1 with the municipality within which the landowner's
 property is located: Provided, however, That the governing body before which the curative
 amendment is brought shall not have the power to adopt any amendment to the joint
 municipal zoning ordinance without the approval of the other municipalities participating
 in the joint municipal zoning ordinance. The challenge shall be directed to the validity
 of the joint municipal zoning ordinance as it applies to the entire area of its jurisdiction.
 (810-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u811-As
 Section 811-A. Area of Jurisdiction for Challenges.--In any challenge to the validity of the joint
 municipal zoning ordinance, the court shall consider the validity of the ordinance
 as it applies to the entire area of its jurisdiction as enacted and shall not limit
 consideration to any single constituent municipality.
 (811-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u812-As
 Section 812-A. Procedure for Joint Municipal Curative Amendments.--(a) The governing bodies of all the participating municipalities may declare the joint
 municipal zoning ordinance or portions thereof substantially invalid and prepare a
 municipal curative amendment pursuant to section 609.2.
 (b) The provisions of section 609.2(4) shall apply to all municipalities participating
 in the joint municipal zoning ordinance.
 (c) (1) In the case of a joint municipal curative amendment involving two or three municipalities,
 the municipalities shall have nine months from the date of declaration of partial
 or total invalidity to enact a curative amendment.
 (2) Subject to the limitation contained in clause (3), where there are more than three
 municipality parties, the nine-month period shall be extended one additional month
 for each municipality in excess of three that is a party to the joint municipal zoning
 ordinance.
 (3) Notwithstanding the additional periods provided for in clause (2), a curative amendment
 shall be enacted by the parties to a joint municipal zoning ordinance not later than
 one year from the date of declaration of partial or total invalidity.
 (812-A amended Oct. 16, 1998, P.L.782, No.97)
 19680247u813-As
 Section 813-A. Publication, Advertisement and Availability of Ordinances.--The content of public
 notices and the procedures for the advertisement and enactment of joint municipal
 zoning ordinances and amendments shall be regulated by section 610.
 (813-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u814-As
 Section 814-A. Registration of Nonconforming Uses.--The registration of nonconforming uses shall
 be as specified by section 613.
 (814-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u815-As
 Section 815-A. Administration.--(a) The governing bodies of the municipalities adopting the joint municipal zoning ordinance
 may establish a joint zoning hearing board pursuant to the authority of section 904,
 except that:
 (1) The joint municipal zoning ordinance shall either create a joint zoning hearing board
 to administer the entire joint municipal zoning ordinance or provide for the retention
 or creation of individual zoning hearing boards in each of the individual participating
 municipalities to administer the new joint municipal zoning ordinance as to properties
 located within each of the individual participating municipalities.
 (2) These same procedures shall be followed by a joint zoning hearing board as set forth
 in Article IX for individual municipal zoning hearing boards.
 (b) The joint municipal zoning ordinance shall specify the number of zoning officers to
 be appointed to administer the ordinance pursuant to section 614. One zoning officer
 may be appointed by each municipality to administer the ordinance within the municipal
 boundaries or a single zoning officer may be appointed to administer the ordinance
 throughout the jurisdiction of the ordinance.
 (815-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u816-As
 Section 816-A. Zoning Appeals.--All rights and procedures provided in Articles IX and X-A shall pertain
 to joint municipal zoning.
 (816-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u817-As
 Section 817-A. Enforcement Penalties.--Penalties for violation of a joint municipal zoning ordinance
 shall be as specified in section 617.1.
 (817-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u818-As
 Section 818-A. Enforcement Remedies.--(a) Enforcement remedies shall be as specified in section 617.
 (b) In addition, the provisions of a joint municipal zoning ordinance shall be binding
 upon the municipalities and may be enforced by appropriate remedy by any one or more
 of the municipalities against any other municipality party thereto.
 (818-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u819-As
 Section 819-A. Finances.--(a) The governing body of a municipality may appropriate and receive funds for a joint
 municipal zoning ordinance in the same manner as authorized for a municipal zoning
 ordinance by section 617.2.
 (b) A joint municipal zoning ordinance shall specify the manner and extent of financing
 the costs for administration and enforcement, including the financial responsibilities
 for defending legal challenges to the ordinance.
 (819-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u820-As
 Section 820-A. Exemptions.--The exemptions for a joint municipal zoning ordinance shall be those
 identified by section 619.
 (820-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u821-As
 Section 821-A. Existing Bodies.--Municipalities which, on or before the effective date of this amendatory
 act, established joint bodies under former Article XI-A of this act, shall have five
 years from the effective date of this amendatory act to comply with the provisions
 of this article.
 (821-A added Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u901h
 ARTICLE IX
 Zoning Hearing Board and other
 Administrative Proceedings
 19680247u901s
 Section 901. General Provisions.--Every municipality which has enacted or enacts a zoning ordinance
 pursuant to this act or prior enabling laws, shall create a zoning hearing board.
 As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term
 "board" shall refer to such zoning hearing board.
 19680247u902s
 Section 902. Existing Boards of Adjustment.--(902 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u903s
 Section 903. Membership of Board.--(a) The membership of the board shall, upon the determination of the governing body, consist
 of either three or five residents of the municipality appointed by resolution by the
 governing body. The terms of office of a three member board shall be three years and
 shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The
 terms of office of a five member board shall be five years and shall be so fixed that
 the term of office of one member of a five member board shall expire each year. If
 a three member board is changed to a five member board, the members of the existing
 three member board shall continue in office until their term of office would expire
 under prior law. The governing body shall appoint two additional members to the board
 with terms scheduled to expire in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 The board shall promptly notify the governing body of any vacancies which occur. Appointments
 to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of
 the board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in the municipality, nor
 shall any member be an employee of the municipality.
 (b) The governing body may appoint by resolution at least one but no more than three residents
 of the municipality to serve as alternate members of the board. The term of office
 of an alternate member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions
 of section 906, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
 discussions of the board to the same and full extent as provided by law for board
 members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting member during
 the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this act and
 as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other elected or appointed
 office in the municipality, including service as a member of the planning commission
 or as a zoning officer, nor shall any alternate be an employee of the municipality.
 Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the board but shall
 not be entitled to vote as a member of the board nor be compensated pursuant to section
 907 unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to section 906.
 (903 amended Nov. 19, 2004, P.L.831, No.99)
 19680247u904s
 Section 904. Joint Zoning Hearing Boards.--(a) Two or more municipalities may, by ordinances enacted in each, create a joint zoning
 hearing board in lieu of a separate board for each municipality. A joint board shall
 consist of two members appointed from among the residents of each municipality by
 its governing body.
 (b) The term of office of members of joint boards shall be five years, except that of
 the two members first appointed from each municipality, the term of office of one
 member shall be three years. When any vacancies occur, the joint board shall promptly
 notify the governing body which appointed the member whose office has become vacant,
 and such governing body shall appoint a member for the unexpired portion of the term.
 Members of the joint board shall hold no other office in the participating municipality.
 (c) Where legal counsel is desired, an attorney, other than the solicitors of the participating
 municipalities, may be appointed to serve as counsel to the joint zoning hearing board.
 (d) In all other respects, including the appointment and seating of alternate members,
 joint zoning hearing boards shall be governed by provisions of this act not inconsistent
 with the provisions of this section.
 19680247u905s
 Section 905. Removal of Members.--Any board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance
 or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the governing
 body which appointed the member, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance
 notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with
 the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
 19680247u906s
 Section 906. Organization of Board.--(a) The board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual
 terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking
 of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the
 board, but the board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct
 any hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by the board as
 provided in section 908.
 (b) The chairman of the board may designate alternate members of the board to replace
 any absent or disqualified member, and if, by reason of absence or disqualification
 of a member, a quorum is not reached, the chairman of the board shall designate as
 many alternate members of the board to sit on the board as may be needed to reach
 a quorum. Any alternate member of the board shall continue to serve on the board in
 all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
 appointed until the board has made a final decision on the matter or case. Designation
 of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
 rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
 (c) The board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent
 with ordinances of the municipality and laws of the Commonwealth. The board shall
 keep full public records of its business, which records shall be the property of the
 municipality, and shall submit a report of its activities to the governing body as
 requested by the governing body.
 (906 amended Nov. 19, 2004, P.L.831, No.99)
 19680247u907s
 Section 907. Expenditures for Services.--Within the limits of funds appropriated by the governing
 body, the board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants
 and other technical and clerical services. Members of the board may receive compensation
 for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the governing body, but in
 no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members
 of the governing body. Alternate members of the board may receive compensation, as
 may be fixed by the governing body, for the performance of their duties when designated
 as alternate members pursuant to section 906, but in no case shall such compensation
 exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the governing
 body.
 19680247u908s
 Section 908. Hearings.--The board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
 the following requirements:
 (1) Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the
 zoning officer, such other persons as the governing body shall designate by ordinance
 and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall
 be given at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in
 the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the board. In addition to the written
 notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted
 on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
 (1.1) The governing body may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the
 zoning hearing board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary
 and members of the zoning hearing board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
 administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not
 include legal expenses of the zoning hearing board, expenses for engineering, architectural
 or other technical consultants or expert witness costs.
 (1.2) The first hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be commenced within 60
 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's application, unless the applicant
 has agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the
 board or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless
 otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall
 complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing.
 Upon the request of the applicant, the board or hearing officer shall assure that
 the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including
 the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation
 of their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after
 the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be
 granted additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed
 to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed
 to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant
 and municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the
 application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings
 for rebuttal. ((1.2) amended Jan. 11, 2002, P.L.13, No.2 and May 9, 2002, P.L.305,
 No.43)
 (2) The hearings shall be conducted by the board or the board may appoint any member or
 an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision
 is called for, the findings shall be made by the board; however, the appellant or
 the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the municipality, may, prior to
 the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the board and accept the
 decision or findings of the hearing officer as final. ((2) amended Jan. 11, 2002,
 P.L.13, No.2)
 (3) The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected by the application
 who has made timely appearance of record before the board, and any other person including
 civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the board. The board shall
 have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances
 in writing on forms provided by the board for that purpose.
 (4) The chairman or acting chairman of the board or the hearing officer presiding shall
 have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
 and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents
 requested by the parties.
 (5) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded
 the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse
 witnesses on all relevant issues.
 (6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious
 evidence may be excluded.
 (7) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record
 of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally
 by the applicant and the board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid
 by the board if the transcript is ordered by the board or hearing officer or shall
 be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the board if such appeal is made,
 and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting
 such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript shall
 bear the cost thereof.
 (8) The board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with
 any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
 notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any
 communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their
 solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material
 so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement
 of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity
 to be present.
 (9) The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision
 or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within
 45 days after the last hearing before the board or hearing officer. Where the application
 is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
 conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on
 any provisions of this act or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
 reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
 appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
 officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final,
 the board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties within
 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon
 to the board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the board's decision
 shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Except
 for challenges filed under section 916.1 where the board fails to render the decision
 within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete
 the required hearing as provided in subsection (1.2), the decision shall be deemed
 to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
 writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered
 in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the board to meet or render a
 decision as hereinabove provided, the board shall give public notice of said decision
 within ten days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
 manner as provided in subsection (1) of this section. If the board shall fail to provide
 such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the
 right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent
 jurisdiction. ((9) amended Jan. 11, 2002, P.L. 13, No.2 and May 9, 2002, P.L.305,
 No.43)
 (10) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings
 shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the
 day following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address
 with the board not later than the last day of the hearing, the board shall provide
 by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of
 the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
 19680247u908v
 Compiler's Note: Section 5 of Act 2 of 2002, which amended section 908, provided that Act 5 shall apply
 only to applications or appeals filed afeter the effective date of Act 2.
 19680247u908.1s
 Section 908.1. Mediation Option.--(a) Parties to proceedings authorized in this article and Article X-A may utilize mediation
 as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the zoning hearing
 board, in no case shall the zoning hearing board initiate mediation or participate
 as a mediating party. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those procedures in
 this article and Article X-A once they have been formally initiated. Nothing in this
 section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as
 modifying any principles of substantive law.
 (b) Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of mediation
 shall be determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of the parties
 to negotiate. Any municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that, in
 each case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop
 terms and conditions for:
 (1) Funding mediation.
 (2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working knowledge of municipal
 zoning and subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in mediation.
 (3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
 (4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this act, provided there is written
 consent by the mediating parties, and by an applicant or municipal decisionmaking
 body if either is not a party to the mediation.
 (5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to participate.
 (6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the mediation sessions
 shall be open or closed to the public.
 (7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the parties, and become
 subject to review and approval by the appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to
 the authorized procedures set forth in the other sections of this act.
 (c) No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the final written
 mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or
 administrative proceedings.
 19680247u909s
 Section 909. Board's Functions: Appeals from the Zoning Officer.--(909 repealed Dec. 21, 1988,
 P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u909.1s
 Section 909.1. Jurisdiction.--(a) The zoning hearing board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
 adjudications in the following matters:
 (1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought
 before the governing body pursuant to sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2).
 (2) (Deleted by amendment).
 (3) Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer, including, but not limited to,
 the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor,
 the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register
 any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
 (4) Appeals from a determination by a municipal engineer or the zoning officer with reference
 to the administration of any flood plain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions
 within a land use ordinance.
 (5) Applications for variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance and flood hazard
 ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to section 910.2.
 (6) Applications for special exceptions under the zoning ordinance or flood plain or flood
 hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to section
 912.1.
 (7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration
 of any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of the zoning
 ordinance.
 (8) Appeals from the zoning officer's determination under section 916.2.
 (9) Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer or municipal engineer in the
 administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
 and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same relate to development
 not involving Article V or VII applications.
 ((a) amended July 4, 2008, P.L.319, No.39)
 (b) The governing body or, except as to clauses (3), (4) and (5), the planning agency,
 if designated, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications
 in the following matters:
 (1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments under Article VII
 pursuant to the provisions of section 702.
 (2) All applications pursuant to section 508 for approval of subdivisions or land developments
 under Article V. Any provision in a subdivision and land development ordinance requiring
 that final action concerning subdivision and land development applications be taken
 by a planning agency rather than the governing body shall vest exclusive jurisdiction
 in the planning agency in lieu of the governing body for purposes of the provisions
 of this paragraph.
 (3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of the zoning ordinance
 pursuant to section 603(c)(2).
 (4) Applications for curative amendment to a zoning ordinance pursuant to sections 609.1
 and 916.1(a)(2).
 (5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to the procedures set
 forth in section 609. Any action on such petitions shall be deemed legislative acts,
 provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish
 existing law with reference to appeals to court.
 (6) Appeals from the determination of the zoning officer or the municipal engineer in
 the administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof with reference
 to sedimentation and erosion control and storm water management insofar as the same
 relate to application for land development under Articles V and VII. Where such determination
 relates only to development not involving an Article V or VII application, the appeal
 from such determination of the zoning officer or the municipal engineer shall be to
 the zoning hearing board pursuant to subsection (a)(9). Where the applicable land
 use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of subdivision and land
 development applications in the planning agency, all appeals from determinations under
 this paragraph shall be to the planning agency and all appeals from the decision of
 the planning agency shall be to court.
 (7) Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to section 405 and applications
 for a permit pursuant to section 406.
 19680247u910s
 Section 910. Board Functions: Challenge to the Validity of any Ordinance or Map.--(910 repealed
 Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u910.1s
 Section 910.1. Applicability of Judicial Remedies.--Nothing contained in this article shall be construed
 to deny the appellant the right to proceed directly to court where appropriate, pursuant
 to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No. 1091 (relating to action in mandamus).
 19680247u910.2s
 Section 910.2. Zoning Hearing Board's Functions; Variances.--(a) The board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions
 of the zoning ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The board
 may by rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary application
 to the zoning officer. The board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
 findings are made where relevant in a given case:
 (1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
 narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
 physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship
 is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created
 by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which
 the property is located.
 (2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility
 that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the
 zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
 enable the reasonable use of the property.
 (3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
 (4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood
 or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair
 the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
 public welfare.
 (5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
 relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
 (b) In granting any variance, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards
 as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance.
 19680247u912s
 Section 912. Board's Functions: Variances.--(912 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u912.1s
 Section 912.1. Zoning Hearing Board's Functions; Special Exception.--Where the governing body, in
 the zoning ordinance, has stated special exceptions to be granted or denied by the
 board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the board shall hear and decide
 requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria.
 In granting a special exception, the board may attach such reasonable conditions and
 safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary
 to implement the purposes of this act and the zoning ordinance.
 19680247u913s
 Section 913. Board's Functions: Special Exceptions.--(913 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u913.1s
 Section 913.1. Unified Appeals.--(913.1 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u913.2s
 Section 913.2. Governing Body's Functions; Conditional Uses.--(a) Where the governing body, in the zoning ordinances, has stated conditional uses to
 be granted or denied by the governing body pursuant to express standards and criteria,
 the governing body shall hold hearings on and decide requests for such conditional
 uses in accordance with such standards and criteria. The hearing shall be conducted
 by the board or the board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing
 officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made
 by the board. However, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition
 to the municipality may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings
 by the board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
 In granting a conditional use, the governing body may attach such reasonable conditions
 and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary
 to implement the purposes of this act in the zoning ordinance. ((a) amended Jan. 11,
 2002, P.L.13, No.2)
 (b) (1) The governing body shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called
 for, make written findings on the conditional use application within 45 days after
 the last hearing before the governing body. Where the application is contested or
 denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based
 thereon, together with any reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of
 this act or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the
 provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the
 light of the facts found.
 (2) Where the governing body fails to render the decision within the period required by
 this subsection or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as
 provided in section 908(1.2), the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
 favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record
 to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
 because of the failure of the governing body to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
 provided, the governing body shall give public notice of the decision within ten days
 from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required
 by the public notice requirements of this act. If the governing body shall fail to
 provide such notice, the applicant may do so. ((2) amended Jan. 11, 2002, P.L.13,
 No.2 and May 9, 2002, P.L.305, No.43)
 (3) Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application
 to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision
 or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant
 personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date.
 (913.2 amended Dec. 18, 1996, P.L.1102, No.165)
 19680247u913.2v
 Compiler's Note: Section 5 of Act 2 of 2002, which amended section 913.2, provided that Act 5 shall
 apply only to applications or appeals filed afeter the effective date of Act 2.
 19680247u913.3s
 Section 913.3. Parties Appellant Before the Board.--Appeals under section 909.1(a)(1), (2), (3),
 (4), (7), (8) and (9) may be filed with the board in writing by the landowner affected,
 any officer or agency of the municipality, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a
 variance under section 910.2 and for special exception under section 912.1 may be
 filed with the board by any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
 19680247u914s
 Section 914. Parties Appellant Before Board.--(914 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u914.1s
 Section 914.1. Time Limitations.--(a) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the board later than 30 days
 after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by an
 appropriate municipal officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to secure
 reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person alleges and proves
 that he had no notice, knowledge, or reason to believe that such approval had been
 given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall
 be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone other
 than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan pursuant
 to section 709 or from an adverse decision by a zoning officer on a challenge to the
 validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to section 916.2 shall preclude an appeal
 from a final approval except in the case where the final submission substantially
 deviates from the approved tentative approval.
 (b) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be filed by the landowner
 within 30 days after notice of the determination is issued.
 19680247u915s
 Section 915. Time Limitations; Persons Aggrieved.--(915 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u915.1s
 Section 915.1. Stay of Proceedings.--(a) Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in section 913.3 and during its pendency
 before the board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order
 or approval of the zoning officer or of any agency or body, and all official action
 thereunder, shall be stayed unless the zoning officer or any other appropriate agency
 or body certifies to the board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent
 peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall
 not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board
 or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to
 the zoning officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
 preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or
 limit the approval are filed with the board by persons other than the applicant, the
 applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such
 persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before the board.
 (b) After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the
 filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the
 merits of the case. It shall be the burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the
 appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines
 that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
 petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee,
 but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision
 of the court.
 (c) The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the amount of the
 bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An order denying a petition
 for bond shall be interlocutory. An order directing the responding party to post a
 bond shall be interlocutory.
 (d) If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an order of
 the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellate
 court sustains the order of the court below to post a bond, the respondent to the
 petition for a bond, upon motion of the petitioner and after hearing in the court
 having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses
 and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
 19680247u916s
 Section 916. Stay of Proceedings.--(916 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u916.1s
 Section 916.1. Validity of Ordinance; Substantive Questions.--(a) A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the validity of an ordinance
 or map or any provision thereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development
 of land in which he has an interest shall submit the challenge either:
 (1) to the zoning hearing board under section 909.1(a); or
 (2) to the governing body under section 909.1(b)(4), together with a request for a curative
 amendment under section 609.1.
 (b) Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of another by an ordinance
 or map, or any provision thereof, who desires to challenge its validity on substantive
 grounds shall first submit their challenge to the zoning hearing board for a decision
 thereon under section 909.1(a)(1).
 (c) The submissions referred to in subsections (a) and (b) shall be governed by the following:
 (1) In challenges before the zoning hearing board, the challenging party shall make a
 written request to the board that it hold a hearing on its challenge. The request
 shall contain the reasons for the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge
 the validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by curative amendment under section
 609.1, his application to the governing body shall contain, in addition to the requirements
 of the written request hereof, the plans and explanatory materials describing the
 use or development proposed by the landowner in lieu of the use or development permitted
 by the challenged ordinance or map. Such plans or other materials shall not be required
 to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
 the issuance of a permit, so long as they provide reasonable notice of the proposed
 use or development and a sufficient basis for evaluating the challenged ordinance
 or map in light thereof. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the landowner from
 first seeking a final approval before submitting his challenge.
 (2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the governing body under subsection
 (a)(2), the request also shall be accompanied by an amendment or amendments to the
 ordinance proposed by the landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
 (3) If the submission is made to the governing body, the municipal solicitor shall represent
 and advise it at the hearing or hearings referred to in section 909.1(b)(4).
 (4) The governing body may retain an independent attorney to present the defense of the
 challenged ordinance or map on its behalf and to present their witnesses on its behalf.
 (5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the governing body
 or the zoning board, as the case may be, shall determine whether the challenged ordinance
 or map is defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by a governing
 body is found to have merit, the governing body shall proceed as provided in section
 609.1. If a challenge heard by a zoning hearing board is found to have merit, the
 decision of the zoning hearing board shall include recommended amendments to the challenged
 ordinance which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the zoning
 hearing board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted
 by the landowner and shall also consider:
 (i) the impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and
 other public service facilities;
 (ii) if the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional
 housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of
 a type actually available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
 excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map;
 (iii) the suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils,
 slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
 features;
 (iv) the impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, flood
 plains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are protected
 or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental
 impacts; and
 (v) the impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses
 which are essential to public health and welfare.
 (6) The governing body or the zoning hearing board, as the case may be, shall render its
 decision within 45 days after the conclusion of the last hearing.
 (7) If the governing body or the zoning board, as the case may be, fails to act on the
 landowner's request within the time limits referred to in paragraph (6), a denial
 of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
 hearing.
 (d) The zoning hearing board or governing body, as the case may be, shall commence its
 hearings within 60 days after the request is filed unless the landowner requests or
 consents to an extension of time.
 (e) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the ordinance
 or map is in question and shall give the place where and the times when a copy of
 the request, including any plans, explanatory material or proposed amendments may
 be examined by the public.
 (f) The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
 (1) the zoning hearing board or governing body, as the case may be, fails to commence
 the hearing within the time limits set forth in subsection (d);
 (2) the governing body notifies the landowner that it will not adopt the curative amendment;
 (3) the governing body adopts another curative amendment which is unacceptable to the
 landowner; or
 (4) the zoning hearing board or governing body, as the case may be, fails to act on the
 request 45 days after the close of the last hearing on the request, unless the time
 is extended by mutual consent by the landowner and municipality.
 (g) Where, after the effective date of this act, a curative amendment proposal is approved
 by the grant of a curative amendment application by the governing body pursuant to
 section 909.1(b)(4) or a validity challenge is sustained by the zoning hearing board
 pursuant to section 909.1(a)(1) or the court acts finally on appeal from denial of
 a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and the proposal or challenge
 so approved requires a further application for subdivision or land development, the
 developer shall have two years from the date of such approval to file an application
 for preliminary or tentative approval pursuant to Article V or VII. Within the two-year
 period, no subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
 ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights
 of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge.
 Upon the filing of the preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of section 508(4)
 shall apply. Where the proposal appended to the curative amendment application or
 the validity challenge is approved but does not require further application under
 any subdivision or land development ordinance, the developer shall have one year within
 which to file for a building permit. Within the one-year period, no subsequent change
 or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall
 be applied in any manner which adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted
 in the curative amendment or the sustained validity challenge. During these protected
 periods, the court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding
 such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
 (h) Where municipalities have adopted a multimunicipal comprehensive plan pursuant to
 Article XI but have not adopted a joint municipal ordinance pursuant to Article VIII-A
 and all municipalities participating in the multimunicipal comprehensive plan have
 adopted and are administering zoning ordinances generally consistent with the provisions
 of the multimunicipal comprehensive plan and a challenge is brought to the validity
 of a zoning ordinance of a participating municipality involving a proposed use, then
 the zoning hearing board or governing body, as the case may be, shall consider the
 availability of uses under zoning ordinances within the municipalities participating
 in the multimunicipal comprehensive plan within a reasonable geographic area and shall
 not limit its consideration to the application of the zoning ordinance on the municipality
 whose zoning ordinance is being challenged. ((h) added June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 (i) A landowner who has challenged on substantive grounds the validity of a zoning ordinance
 or map either by submission of a curative amendment to the governing body under subsection
 (a)(2) or to the zoning hearing board under section 909.1(a)(1) shall not submit any
 additional substantive challenges involving the same parcel, group of parcels or part
 thereof until such time as the status of the landowner's original challenge has been
 finally determined or withdrawn: Provided, however, That if after the date of the
 landowner's original challenge the municipality adopts a substantially new or different
 zoning ordinance or zoning map, the landowner may file a second substantive challenge
 to the new or different zoning ordinance or zoning map under subsection (a). ((i)
 added Dec. 20, 2000, P.L.940, No.127)
 19680247u916.2s
 Section 916.2. Procedure to Obtain Preliminary Opinion.--In order not to unreasonably delay the time
 when a landowner may secure assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposed
 to build is free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary
 approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable, the landowner
 may advance the date from which time for any challenge to the ordinance or map will
 run under section 914.1 by the following procedure:
 (1) The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his proposed use or
 development to the zoning officer for a preliminary opinion as to their compliance
 with the applicable ordinances and maps. Such plans and other materials shall not
 be required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval
 or for the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable notice
 of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a preliminary opinion
 as to its compliance.
 (2) If the zoning officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or development complies
 with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall be published once each week for two
 successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
 shall include a general description of the proposed use or development and its location,
 by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times where the plans and
 other materials may be examined by the public. The favorable preliminary approval
 under section 914.1 and the time therein specified for commencing a proceeding with
 the board shall run from the time when the second notice thereof has been published.
 19680247u917s
 Section 917. Applicability of Ordinance Amendments.--When an application for either a special exception
 or a conditional use has been filed with either the zoning hearing board or governing
 body, as relevant, and the subject matter of such application would ultimately constitute
 either a land development as defined in section 107 or a subdivision as defined in
 section 107, no change or amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing
 ordinance or plans shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
 applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the
 provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application
 was duly filed. Provided, further, should such an application be approved by either
 the zoning hearing board or governing body, as relevant, applicant shall be entitled
 to proceed with the submission of either land development or subdivision plans within
 a period of six months or longer as may be approved by either the zoning hearing board
 or the governing body following the date of such approval in accordance with the provisions
 of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was
 duly filed before either the zoning hearing board or governing body, as relevant.
 If either a land development or subdivision plan is so filed within said period, such
 plan shall be subject to the provisions of section 508(1) through (4) and specifically
 to the time limitations of section 508(4) which shall commence as of the date of filing
 such land development or subdivision plan.
 (917 amended Dec. 20, 2000, P.L.940, No.127)
 19680247u918s
 Section 918. Special Applicability Provisions.--A municipal zoning ordinance enacted on or before
 August 21, 2000, shall not be invalidated, superseded or affected by any amendatory
 provision of the act of June 22, 2000 (P.L.483, No.67), entitled "An act amending
 the act of July 31, 1968 (P.L.805, No.247), entitled, as amended, 'An act to empower
 cities of the second class A, and third class, boroughs, incorporated towns, townships
 of the first and second classes including those within a county of the second class
 and counties of the second through eighth classes, individually or jointly, to plan
 their development and to govern the same by zoning, subdivision and land development
 ordinances, planned residential development and other ordinances, by official maps,
 by the reservation of certain land for future public purpose and by the acquisition
 of such land; to promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning practices
 and to promote the effective utilization of renewable energy sources; providing for
 the establishment of planning commissions, planning departments, planning committees
 and zoning hearing boards, authorizing them to charge fees, make inspections and hold
 public hearings; providing for mediation; providing for transferable development rights;
 providing for appropriations, appeals to courts and penalties for violations; and
 repealing acts and parts of acts,' adding definitions; providing for intergovernmental
 cooperative planning and implementation agreements; further providing for repeals;
 and making an editorial change," or the act of June 22, 2000 (P.L.495, No.68), entitled
 "An act amending the act of July 31, 1968 (P.L.805, No.247), entitled, as amended,
 'An act to empower cities of the second class A, and third class, boroughs, incorporated
 towns, townships of the first and second classes including those within a county of
 the second class and counties of the second through eighth classes, individually or
 jointly, to plan their development and to govern the same by zoning, subdivision and
 land development ordinances, planned residential development and other ordinances,
 by official maps, by the reservation of certain land for future public purpose and
 by the acquisition of such land; to promote the conservation of energy through the
 use of planning practices and to promote the effective utilization of renewable energy
 sources; providing for the establishment of planning commissions, planning departments,
 planning committees and zoning hearing boards, authorizing them to charge fees, make
 inspections and hold public hearings; providing for mediation; providing for transferable
 development rights; providing for appropriations, appeals to courts and penalties
 for violations; and repealing acts and parts of acts,' further providing for the purpose
 of the act; adding certain definitions; further providing for various matters relating
 to the comprehensive plan and for compliance by counties; providing for funding for
 municipal planning and for neighboring municipalities; further providing for certain
 ordinances; adding provisions relating to projects of regional impact; providing for
 traditional neighborhood development; further providing for grant of power, for contents
 of subdivision and land development ordinance, for approval of plats and for recording
 of plats and deeds; and providing for municipal authorities and water companies and
 for transferable development rights," and such ordinance provisions shall continue
 in full force and effect until February 21, 2001; provided, however, any such ordinance
 shall be subject to such amendatory provisions on and after February 22, 2001.
 (918 added Dec. 20, 2000, P.L.940, No.127)
 19680247u1001h
 ARTICLE X
 Appeals
 (Art. repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1001s
 Section 1001. Zoning Appeals.--(1001 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1002s
 Section 1002. Venue.--(1002 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1003s
 Section 1003. Validity of Ordinance; Procedural Questions.--(1003 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329,
 No.170)
 19680247u1004s
 Section 1004. Validity of Ordinance; Substantive Questions; Landowner Appeals.--(1004 repealed Dec.
 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1005s
 Section 1005. Validity of Ordinance; Substantive Questions; Appeals by Persons Aggrieved.--(1005
 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1006s
 Section 1006. Applications, Decisions and Orders Not Involving the Validity of an Ordinance; Landowner
 Appeals.--(1006 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1007s
 Section 1007. Decisions and Orders Not Involving the Validity of an Ordinance; Appeals by Persons
 Aggrieved.--(1007 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1008s
 Section 1008. Appeals to Court; Commencement; Stay of Proceedings.--(1008 repealed Dec. 21, 1988,
 P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1009s
 Section 1009. Intervention.--(1009 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1010s
 Section 1010. Hearing and Argument of Zoning Appeal.--(1010 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1011s
 Section 1011. Judicial Relief.--(1011 repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1001-Ah
 ARTICLE X-A
 Appeals to Court
 19680247u1001-As
 Section 1001-A. Land Use Appeals.--The procedures set forth in this article shall constitute the exclusive
 mode for securing review of any decision rendered pursuant to Article IX or deemed
 to have been made under this act.
 19680247u1002-As
 Section 1002-A. Jurisdiction and Venue on Appeal; Time for Appeal.--(a) All appeals from all land use decisions rendered pursuant to Article IX shall be taken
 to the court of common pleas of the judicial district wherein the land is located
 and shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the decision as provided in 42 Pa.C.S.
 § 5572 (relating to time of entry of order) or, in the case of a deemed decision,
 within 30 days after the date upon which notice of said deemed decision is given as
 set forth in section 908(9) of this act. It is the express intent of the General Assembly
 that, except in cases in which an unconstitutional deprivation of due process would
 result from its application, the 30-day limitation in this section should be applied
 in all appeals from decisions.
 (b) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or
 alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption shall be raised by appeal
 taken directly to the court of common pleas of the judicial district in which the
 municipality adopting the ordinance is located in accordance with 42 Pa.C.S. § 5571.1
 (relating to appeals from ordinances, resolutions, maps, etc.).
 (1002-A amended July 4, 2008, P.L.319, No.39)
 19680247u1002.1-As
 Section 1002.1-A. Time for Appeal; Procedural Defects of Decisions.--(a) This section shall apply to all appeals challenging the validity of a land use decision
 on the basis of a defect in procedures prescribed by statute or ordinance.
 (b) Except as otherwise provided in section 108, all appeals challenging the validity
 of a decision solely on the basis of a defect in procedure shall be filed within the
 time period provided in section 1002-A(a) unless a party establishes each of the following:
 (1) That the person filing the appeal had insufficient actual or constructive notice of
 the decision to permit filing an appeal within the time period provided in section
 1002-A(a). Notice of a hearing prior to the entry of a decision in accordance with
 section 908(1), notice of a decision in accordance with section 908(10) or notice
 of a deemed decision provided in accordance with this act shall establish constructive
 notice as a matter of law in any appeal under this section.
 (2) That because of the insufficient actual or constructive notice of the decision, the
 application of the time limitation in section 1002-A(a) would result in an impermissible
 deprivation of constitutional rights.
 (c) Appeals under this section shall only be permitted by an aggrieved person who can
 establish that reliance on the validity of the challenged decision resulted or could
 result in a use of property that directly affects such person's substantive property
 rights.
 (d) No decision challenged in an appeal pursuant to this section shall be deemed void
 from inception except as follows:
 (1) In the case of an appeal brought within the time period provided in section 1002-A(a),
 the party alleging the defect must meet the burden of proving that there was a failure
 to strictly comply with procedure.
 (2) In the case of an appeal exempt from the time period provided in section 1002-A(a)
 or brought pursuant to section 108, the party alleging the defect must meet the burden
 of proving that because of the alleged defect in procedure alone:
 (i) the public was denied notice sufficient to permit participation in the proceedings
 prior to the entry of the decision to the extent such participation was authorized
 by statute or ordinance; or
 (ii) those whose substantive property rights were or could be directly affected by the
 entry of the decision were denied an opportunity to participate in proceedings prior
 to the entry of the decision.
 (e) Substantial compliance with notice of a hearing required prior to the entry of a decision
 in accordance with section 908(1) shall establish notice adequate to permit public
 participation as a matter of law in any appeal under this section.
 (f) An adjudication that a decision is void from inception shall not affect any previously
 acquired rights of property owners who have exercised good faith reliance on the validity
 of the decision prior to the determination.
 (1002.1-A added July 4, 2008, P.L.319, No.39)
 19680247u1002.1-Av
 Compiler's Note: Section 6 of Act 39 of 2008, which added section 1002.1-A, provided that section 1002.1-A
 shall apply beginning on the effective date of an amendment to 42 Pa.C.S. that provides
 for appeals from ordinances, resolutions, maps and similar actions of a political
 subdivision. Section 5571.1 of Title 42 (relating to appeals from ordinances, resolutions,
 maps, etc.) was added July 4, 2008, P.L.325, No.40, effective immediately.
 19680247u1003-As
 Section 1003-A. Appeals to Court; Commencement; Stay of Proceedings.--(a) Land use appeals shall be entered as of course by the prothonotary or clerk upon the
 filing of a land use appeal notice which concisely sets forth the grounds on which
 the appellant relies. The appeal notice need not be verified. The land use appeal
 notice shall be accompanied by a true copy thereof.
 (b) Upon filing of a land use appeal, the prothonotary or clerk shall forthwith, as of
 course, send to the governing body, board or agency whose decision or action has been
 appealed, by registered or certified mail, the copy of the land use appeal notice,
 together with a writ of certiorari commanding said governing body, board or agency,
 within 20 days after receipt thereof, to certify to the court its entire record in
 the matter in which the land use appeal has been taken, or a true and complete copy
 thereof, including any transcript of testimony in existence and available to the governing
 body, board or agency at the time it received the writ of certiorari.
 (c) If the appellant is a person other than the landowner of the land directly involved
 in the decision or action appealed from, the appellant, within seven days after the
 land use appeal is filed, shall serve a true copy of the land use appeal notice by
 mailing said notice to the landowner or his attorney at his last known address. For
 identification of such landowner, the appellant may rely upon the record of the municipality
 and, in the event of good faith mistakes as to such identity, may make such service
 nunc pro tunc by leave of court.
 (d) The filing of an appeal in court under this section shall not stay the action appealed
 from, but the appellants may petition the court having jurisdiction of land use appeals
 for a stay. If the appellants are persons who are seeking to prevent a use or development
 of the land of another, whether or not a stay is sought by them, the landowner whose
 use or development is in question may petition the court to order the appellants to
 post bond as a condition to proceeding with the appeal. After the petition for posting
 a bond is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of
 the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of
 the case. It shall be the burden of the landowners to prove the appeal is frivolous.
 After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the appeal
 is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for posting a bond. The right to petition
 the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee, but
 such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision of the
 court. The question of the amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion
 of the court. An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
 directing the respondent to the petition for posting a bond to post a bond shall be
 interlocutory. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for posting a
 bond from an order of the court dismissing a land use appeal for refusal to post a
 bond, such responding party, upon motion of petitioner and, after hearing in the court
 having jurisdiction of land use appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs,
 expenses and attorney fees incurred by petitioner.
 19680247u1004-As
 Section 1004-A. Intervention.--Within the 30 days first following the filing of a land use appeal,
 if the appeal is from a board or agency of a municipality, the municipality and any
 owner or tenant of property directly involved in the action appealed from may intervene
 as of course by filing a notice of intervention, accompanied by proof of service of
 the same, upon each appellant or each appellant's counsel of record. All other intervention
 shall be governed by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure.
 19680247u1005-As
 Section 1005-A. Hearing and Argument of Land Use Appeal.--If, upon motion, it is shown that proper
 consideration of the land use appeal requires the presentation of additional evidence,
 a judge of the court may hold a hearing to receive additional evidence, may remand
 the case to the body, agency or officer whose decision or order has been brought up
 for review, or may refer the case to a referee to receive additional evidence, provided
 that appeals brought before the court pursuant to section 916.1 shall not be remanded
 for further hearings before any body, agency or officer of the municipality. If the
 record below includes findings of fact made by the governing body, board or agency
 whose decision or action is brought up for review and the court does not take additional
 evidence or appoint a referee to take additional evidence, the findings of the governing
 body, board or agency shall not be disturbed by the court if supported by substantial
 evidence. If the record does not include findings of fact or if additional evidence
 is taken by the court or by a referee, the court shall make its own findings of fact
 based on the record below as supplemented by the additional evidence, if any.
 19680247u1006-As
 Section 1006-A. Judicial Relief.--(a) In a land use appeal, the court shall have power to declare any ordinance or map invalid
 and set aside or modify any action, decision or order of the governing body, agency
 or officer of the municipality brought up on appeal.
 (b) Where municipalities have adopted a joint municipal comprehensive plan and enacted
 a zoning ordinance or ordinances consistent with the joint municipal comprehensive
 plan within a region pursuant to Articles VIII-A and XI, the court, when determining
 the validity of a challenge to such a municipality's zoning ordinance, shall consider
 the zoning ordinance or ordinances as they apply to the entire region and shall not
 limit its consideration to the application of the zoning ordinance within the boundaries
 of the respective municipalities.
 (b.1) Where municipalities have adopted a multimunicipal comprehensive plan pursuant to
 Article XI but have not adopted a joint municipal ordinance pursuant to Article VIII-A
 and all municipalities participating in the multimunicipal comprehensive plan have
 adopted and are administrating zoning ordinances generally consistent with the provisions
 of the multimunicipal comprehensive plan and a challenge is brought to the validity
 of a zoning ordinance of a participating municipality involving a proposed use, then
 the court shall consider the availability of uses under zoning ordinances within the
 municipalities participating in the multimunicipal comprehensive plan within a reasonable
 geographic area and shall not limit its consideration to the application of the zoning
 ordinance on the municipality whose zoning ordinance is being challenged. ((b.1) added
 June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 (b.2) Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, each municipality
 shall provide for reasonable coal mining activities in its zoning ordinance. ((b.2)
 added June 22, 2000, P.L.495, No.68)
 (c) If the court finds that an ordinance or map, or a decision or order thereunder, which
 has been brought up for review unlawfully prevents or restricts a development or use
 which has been described by the landowner through plans and other materials submitted
 to the governing body, agency or officer of the municipality whose action or failure
 to act is in question on the appeal, it may order the described development or use
 approved as to all elements or it may order it approved as to some elements and refer
 other elements to the governing body, agency or officer having jurisdiction thereof
 for further proceedings, including the adoption of alternative restrictions, in accordance
 with the court's opinion and order.
 (d) Upon motion by any of the parties or upon motion by the court, the judge of the court
 may hold a hearing or hearings to receive additional evidence or employ experts to
 aid the court to frame an appropriate order. If the court employs an expert, the report
 or evidence of such expert shall be available to any party and he shall be subject
 to examination or cross-examination by any party. He shall be paid reasonable compensation
 for his services which may be assessed against any or all of the parties as determined
 by the court. The court shall retain jurisdiction of the appeal during the pendency
 of any such further proceedings and may, upon motion of the landowner, issue such
 supplementary orders as it deems necessary to protect the rights of the landowner
 as declared in its opinion and order.
 (e) The fact that the plans and other materials are not in a form or are not accompanied
 by other submissions which are required for final approval of the development or use
 in question or for the issuance of permits shall not prevent the court from granting
 the definitive relief authorized. The court may act upon preliminary or sketch plans
 by framing its decree to take into account the need for further submissions before
 final approval is granted.
 19680247u1101h
 ARTICLE XI
 Intergovernmental Cooperative Planning
 and Implementation Agreements
 (Hdg. amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1101s
 Section 1101. Purposes.--It is the purpose of this article:
 (1) To provide for development that is compatible with surrounding land uses and that
 will complement existing land development with a balance of commercial, industrial
 and residential uses.
 (2) To protect and maintain the separate identity of Pennsylvania's communities and to
 prevent the unnecessary conversion of valuable and limited agricultural land.
 (3) To encourage cooperation and coordinated planning among adjoining municipalities so
 that each municipality accommodates its share of the multimunicipal growth burden
 and does not induce unnecessary or premature development of rural lands.
 (4) To minimize disruption of the economy and environment of existing communities.
 (5) To complement the economic and transportation needs of the region and this Commonwealth.
 (6) To provide for the continuation of historic community patterns.
 (7) To provide for coordinated highways, public services and development.
 (8) To ensure that new public water and wastewater treatment systems are constructed in
 areas that will result in the efficient utilization of existing systems, prior to
 the development and construction of new systems.
 (9) To ensure that new or major extension of existing public water and wastewater treatment
 systems are constructed only in those areas within which anticipated growth and development
 can adequately be sustained within the financial and environmental resources of the
 area.
 (10) To identify those areas where growth and development will occur so that a full range
 of public infrastructure services, including sewer, water, highways, police and fire
 protection, public schools, parks, open space and other services, can be adequately
 planned and provided as needed to accommodate the growth that occurs.
 (11) To encourage innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development to
 meet growing population demands by an increased variety in type, design and layout
 of structures and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary
 to such structures.
 (12) To facilitate the development of affordable and other types of housing in numbers
 consistent with the need for such housing as shown by existing and projected population
 and employment data for the region.
 (1101 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1102s
 Section 1102. Intergovernmental Cooperative Planning and Implementation Agreements.--For
 the purpose of developing, adopting and implementing a comprehensive plan for the
 entire county or for any area within the county, the governing bodies of municipalities
 located within the county or counties may enter into intergovernmental cooperative
 agreements, as provided by 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 23 Subch. A (relating to intergovernmental
 cooperation), except for any provisions permitting initiative and referendum. Such
 agreements may also be entered into between and among counties and municipalities
 for areas that include municipalities in more than one county, and between and among
 counties, municipalities, authorities and special districts providing water and sewer
 facilities, transportation planning or other services within the area of a plan and
 with the opportunity for the active participation of State agencies and school districts.
 Implementation of the comprehensive plan and subdivision and zoning ordinances shall
 be accomplished in accordance with articles of this act.
 (1102 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1103s
 Section 1103. County or Multimunicipal Comprehensive Plans.--(a) The comprehensive plan that is the subject of an agreement may be developed by the
 municipalities or, at the request of the municipalities, by the county planning agency,
 or agencies in the case of a plan covering municipalities in more than one county,
 in cooperation with municipalities within the area and shall include all the elements
 required or authorized in section 301 for the region of the plan, including a plan
 to meet the housing needs of present residents and those individuals and families
 anticipated to reside in the area of the plan, which may include conservation of presently
 sound housing, rehabilitation of housing in declining neighborhoods and the accommodations
 of expected new housing in different dwelling types and of appropriate densities for
 households of all income levels. The plan may:
 (1) Designate growth areas where:
 (i) Orderly and efficient development to accommodate the projected growth of the area
 within the next 20 years is planned for residential and mixed use densities of one
 unit or more per acre.
 (ii) Commercial, industrial and institutional uses to provide for the economic and employment
 needs of the area and to insure that the area has an adequate tax base are planned
 for.
 (iii) Services to serve such development are provided or planned for.
 (2) Designate potential future growth areas where future development is planned for densities
 to accompany the orderly extension and provision of services.
 (3) Designate rural resource areas, if applicable, where:
 (i) Rural resource uses are planned for.
 (ii) Development at densities that are compatible with rural resource uses are or may be
 permitted.
 (iii) Infrastructure extensions or improvements are not intended to be publicly financed
 by municipalities, except in villages, unless the participating or affected municipalities
 agree that such service should be provided to an area for health or safety reasons
 or to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section 1101.
 (4) Plan for the accommodation of all categories of uses within the area of the plan,
 provided, however, that all uses need not be provided in every municipality but shall
 be planned and provided for within a reasonable geographic area of the plan.
 (5) Plan for developments of areawide significance and impact, particularly those identified
 in section 301(3) and (4).
 (6) Plan for the conservation and enhancement of the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic
 resources within the area of the plan.
 (b) The county may facilitate a multimunicipal process and may enter into cooperative
 planning agreements with participating municipalities governing particular planning
 subjects and responsibilities. The planning process shall include a public participation
 process to assure that all governing bodies, municipal authorities, school districts
 and agencies, whether public or private, having jurisdiction or operating within the
 area of the plan and landowners and citizens affected by the plan have an opportunity
 to be heard prior to the public hearings required for the adoption of the plan under
 section 302(a).
 (c) Adoption of the plan and plan amendments shall conform to the requirements of section
 302 and may be reflected on the official map of each participating municipality pursuant
 to section 401. Where a county and municipality have developed and adopted a comprehensive
 county or multimunicipal plan that conforms to the requirements of this article within
 five years prior to the date of adoption of this article, the plan may be implemented
 by agreements as provided for in this article.
 (1103 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1104s
 Section 1104. Implementation Agreements.--(a) In order to implement multimunicipal comprehensive plans under section 1103, counties
 and municipalities shall have authority to enter into intergovernmental cooperative
 agreements.
 (b) Cooperative implementation agreements shall:
 (1) Establish the process that the participating municipalities will use to achieve general
 consistency between the county or multimunicipal comprehensive plan and zoning ordinances,
 subdivision and land development and capital improvement plans within participating
 municipalities, including adoption of conforming ordinances by participating municipalities
 within two years and a mechanism for resolving disputes over the interpretation of
 the multimunicipal comprehensive plan and the consistency of implementing plans and
 ordinances.
 (2) Establish a process for review and approval of developments of regional significance
 and impact that are proposed within any participating municipality. Subdivision and
 land development approval powers under this act shall only be exercised by the municipality
 in which the property where the approval is sought. Under no circumstances shall a
 subdivision or land development applicant be required to undergo more than one approval
 process.
 (3) Establish the role and responsibilities of participating municipalities with respect
 to implementation of the plan, including the provision of public infrastructure services
 within participating municipalities as described in subsection (d), the provision
 of affordable housing and purchase of real property, including rights-of-way and easements.
 (4) Require a yearly report by participating municipalities to the county planning agency
 and by the county planning agency to the participating municipalities concerning activities
 carried out pursuant to the agreement during the previous year. Such reports shall
 include summaries of public infrastructure needs in growth areas and progress toward
 meeting those needs through capital improvement plans and implementing actions and
 reports on development applications and dispositions for residential, commercial and
 industrial development in each participating municipality for the purpose of evaluating
 the extent of provision for all categories of use and housing for all income levels
 within the region of the plan.
 (5) Describe any other duties and responsibilities as may be agreed upon by the parties.
 (c) Cooperative implementation agreements may designate growth areas, future growth areas
 and rural resource areas within the plan. The agreement shall also provide a process
 for amending the multimunicipal comprehensive plan and redefining the designated growth
 area, future growth area and rural resource area within the plan.
 (d) The county may facilitate convening representatives of municipalities, municipal authorities,
 special districts, public utilities, whether public or private, or other agencies
 that provide or declare an interest in providing a public infrastructure service in
 a public infrastructure service area or a portion of a public infrastructure service
 area within a growth area, as established in a county or multimunicipal comprehensive
 plan, for the purpose of negotiating agreements for the provision of such services.
 The county may provide or contract with others to provide technical assistance, mediation
 or dispute resolution services in order to assist the parties in negotiating such
 agreements.
 (1104 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1105s
 Section 1105. Legal Effect.--(a) Where municipalities have adopted a county plan or a multimunicipal plan is adopted
 under this article and the participating municipalities have conformed their local
 plans and ordinances to the county or multimunicipal plan by implementing cooperative
 agreements and adopting appropriate resolutions and ordinances, the following shall
 apply:
 (1) Sections 916.1 and 1006-A.
 (2) State agencies shall consider and may rely upon comprehensive plans and zoning ordinances
 when reviewing applications for the funding or permitting of infrastructure or facilities.
 (3) State agencies shall consider and may give priority consideration to applications
 for financial or technical assistance for projects consistent with the county or multimunicipal
 plan.
 (b) Participating municipalities that have entered into implementation agreements to carry
 out a county or multimunicipal plan as described in this article shall have the following
 additional powers:
 (1) To provide by cooperative agreement for the sharing of tax revenues and fees by municipalities
 within the region of the plan.
 (2) To adopt a transfer of development rights program by adoption of an ordinance applicable
 to the region of the plan so as to enable development rights to be transferred from
 rural resource areas in any municipality within the plan to designated growth areas
 in any municipality within the plan.
 (c) Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize a municipality to regulate
 the allocation or withdrawal of water resources by a municipal authority or water
 company that is otherwise regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
 or other Federal or State agencies or statutes.
 (d) Except as provided in section 619.2, nothing in this article shall be construed as
 limiting the authority of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission over the implementation,
 location, construction and maintenance of public utility facilities and the rendering
 of public utility services to the public.
 (1105 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1106s
 Section 1106. Specific Plans.--(a) Participating municipalities shall have authority to adopt a specific plan for the
 systematic implementation of a county or multimunicipal comprehensive plan for any
 nonresidential part of the area covered by the plan. Such specific plan shall include
 a text and a diagram or diagrams and implementing ordinances which specify all of
 the following in detail:
 (1) The distribution, location, extent of area and standards for land uses and facilities,
 including design of sewage, water, drainage and other essential facilities needed
 to support the land uses.
 (2) The location, classification and design of all transportation facilities, including,
 but not limited to, streets and roads needed to serve the land uses described in the
 specific plan.
 (3) Standards for population density, land coverage, building intensity and supporting
 services, including utilities.
 (4) Standards for the preservation, conservation, development and use of natural resources,
 including the protection of significant open spaces, resource lands and agricultural
 lands within or adjacent to the area covered by the specific plan.
 (5) A program of implementation including regulations, financing of the capital improvements
 and provisions for repealing or amending the specific plan. Regulations may include
 zoning, storm water, subdivision and land development, highway access and any other
 provisions for which municipalities are authorized by law to enact. The regulations
 may be amended into the county or municipal ordinances or adopted as separate ordinances.
 If enacted as separate ordinances for the area covered by the specific plan, the ordinances
 shall repeal and replace any county or municipal ordinances in effect within the area
 covered by the specific plan, and ordinances shall conform to the provisions of the
 specific plan.
 (b) (1) No specific plan may be adopted or amended unless the proposed plan or amendment is
 consistent with an adopted county or multimunicipal comprehensive plan.
 (2) No capital project by any municipal authority or municipality shall be approved or
 undertaken and no final plan, development plan or plat for any subdivision or development
 of land shall be approved unless such projects, plans or plats are consistent with
 the adopted specific plan.
 (c) In adopting or amending a specific plan, a county and participating municipalities
 shall use the same procedures as provided in this article for adopting comprehensive
 plans and ordinances.
 (d) Whenever a specific plan has been adopted, applicants for subdivision or land development
 approval shall be required to submit only a final plan as provided in Article V, provided
 that such final plan is consistent with and implements the adopted specific plan.
 (e) A county or counties and participating municipalities are prohibited from assessing
 subdivision and land development applicants for the cost of the specific plan.
 (1106 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1107s
 Section 1107. Saving Clause.--(a) The passage of this act and the repeal by it of any prior enabling laws relating to
 regional planning shall not invalidate any regional planning commission created under
 such other laws. This act, in such respect, shall be deemed a continuation and codification
 of such prior enabling laws.
 (b) The amendment of this article shall not invalidate any joint municipal planning commission
 established under the former provisions of this article. A joint municipal planning
 commission shall continue to function under the amended provisions of this article.
 (1107 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)
 19680247u1101-Ah
 ARTICLE XI-A
 WASTEWATER PROCESSING COOPERATIVE PLANNING
 (Art. added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u1101-As
 Section 1101-A. Definitions.
 The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings
 given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
 "Department." The Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth.
 "Wastewater system official." Either:
 (1) the manager of a wastewater system; or
 (2) if a manager is not employed to oversee a wastewater system, the system municipal
 officials of the municipality in which the wastewater system exists.
 (1101-A added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u1102-As
 Section 1102-A. Notification requirement.
 (a) Notice to wastewater systems official.--
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), notwithstanding any other provision of law, this
 section applies to a person who files an application for:
 (i) development, plat approval, planned residential development or waiver of land development
 under this act; or
 (ii) a construction permit under section 502 of the act of November 10, 1999 (P.L.491,
 No.45), known as the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
 (2) This article does not apply to:
 (i) an application that involves new construction or alteration or renovation of a one-family
 or two-family dwelling;
 (ii) an application that has an approved sewer module; or
 (iii) an application for which the department has issued a determination that sewage planning
 is not required or has granted an exemption from sewage planning.
 (3) A person subject to this subsection shall provide written notification of filing the
 application to the wastewater system official serving the property identified in the
 application. A copy of the written notification shall be provided by the person to
 the municipality.
 (b) Failure to notify.--No application subject to subsection (a) may be deemed by the
 municipality to be administratively complete until the municipality receives a copy
 of the written notification required by subsection (a).
 (1102-A added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u1103-As
 Section 1103-A. Review by wastewater system officials.
 (a) Wastewater systems review.--
 (1) Upon receipt of the notification required under section 1102-A(a), the wastewater
 system official shall review the notification to determine the impact of the application
 on the wastewater system. The wastewater system official may request additional information,
 including a copy of the application, from the applicant.
 (2) (i) Except as provided under subparagraph (ii), review by the wastewater system official
 shall be completed within 30 days of receipt of the notification required under section
 1102-A. For good cause shown, the wastewater system official may request and the municipality
 shall grant an extension of up to 15 days for completion of the review.
 (ii) If another statute establishes an application review period of 30 days or less, the
 review period and extension provided under subparagraph (i) shall not apply and the
 wastewater system official shall complete the review within the review period provided
 by that statute.
 (3) If a municipality does not receive any notice from the wastewater system official
 within the time period provided under paragraph (2), the municipality shall proceed
 with the application as if the application is in compliance with the requirements
 of the wastewater system.
 (b) Notification of results of review.--
 (1) Upon completion of the review required under subsection (a), the wastewater system
 official shall notify the applicant and the municipality in writing of its findings,
 which shall include a statement regarding the expected impact of the application on
 the current wastewater system.
 (2) If the application will cause the wastewater system to exceed its permitted capacity
 or will result in necessary upgrades to the wastewater system's infrastructure, the
 written notice of the wastewater system official shall include the specific reasons
 that are causing the wastewater system to exceed its permitted capacity or the necessity
 for upgrades to the wastewater system's infrastructure.
 (c) Approval of applications.--Except for applications which are exempt from the provisions
 of this article as provided under section 1102-A(a)(2), a municipality may not:
 (1) grant final approval of an application for development, plat approval or planned residential
 development under this act unless final approval is conditioned upon receipt of a
 waiver of or an approved exemption from sewage planning or written approval of the
 application is received from the wastewater system official; or
 (2) approve an application for a construction permit under section 502 of the act of November
 10, 1999 (P.L.491, No.45), known as the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, unless
 the application has been reviewed under this section.
 (d) Right of appeal.--Any person aggrieved by a decision of a wastewater system official
 shall be entitled to seek the remedies provided under the act of January 24, 1966
 (1965 P.L.1535, No.537), known as the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
 (1103-A added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u1104-As
 Section 1104-A. Applicability.
 This article shall apply as follows:
 (1) This article shall apply to applications for development, plat approval, planned residential
 development, waiver of land development or construction permits if the development
 or construction utilizes wastewater treatment service provided by a county wastewater
 treatment authority incorporated in a county of the second class A.
 (2) This article shall apply to all municipalities served by the authority under paragraph
 (1).
 (1104-A added July 5, 2012, P.L.928, No.97)
 19680247u1105-As
 Section 1105-A. Adoption of Regional Zoning Ordinances.--(1105-A repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329,
 No.170)
 19680247u1106-As
 Section 1106-A. Amendments to Regional Zoning Ordinance.--(1106-A repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329,
 No.170)
 19680247u1107-As
 Section 1107-A. Regional Hearing Board.--(1107-A repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1108-As
 Section 1108-A. Intention to Withdraw.--(1108-A repealed Dec. 21, 1988, P.L.1329, No.170)
 19680247u1201h
 ARTICLE XII
 Repeals
 19680247u1201s
 Section 1201. Specific Repeals.--The following acts and parts of acts and amendments thereof are
 repealed to the extent hereinafter specified:
 (1) Section 12, act of May 16, 1891 (P.L.75, No.59), entitled "An act in relation to the
 laying out, opening, widening, straightening, extending or vacating streets and alleys,
 and the construction of bridges in the several municipalities of this Commonwealth,
 the grading, paving, macadamizing or otherwise improving streets and alleys, providing
 for ascertaining the damages to private property resulting therefrom, the assessment
 of the damages, costs and expenses thereof upon the property benefited, and the construction
 of sewers and payment of the damages, costs and expenses thereof, including damages
 to private property resulting therefrom," as to cities of the second class A, incorporated
 towns and townships of the first and second class.
 (2) Sections 1151, 1152, 1153, 1154, 1155, 1156, 1601, 1602, 1603, 1604, 1605, 1606, 1607,
 1608, 1609, 1711, 1721, 1722, 2706, 2707, 3201, 3202, 3203, 3204, 3205, 3206, 3207,
 3208, 3209 and 3210, act of February 1, 1966 (P.L.1656, No.581), known as "The Borough
 Code," absolutely.
 (3) Sections 2001, 3015, 3016, 3061, 3062, 3063, 3064, 3065, 3066, 3067, 3068, 3101, 3102,
 3103, 3104, 3105, 3106, 3107, 3107.1, 3107.2, 3108, 3109, 3110, 3111, 3201, 3202 and
 3203, act of June 24, 1931 (P.L.1206, No.331), known as "The First Class Township
 Code," reenacted and amended May 27, 1949 (P.L.1955, No.569), absolutely.
 (4) Sections 2901, 2902, 2903, 2904, 2905, 2906, 3701, 3702, 4001, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4005,
 4006, 4101, 4102, 4103, 4104, 4105, 4106, 4107, 4110, 4111, 4112, 4113, 4114, 4120,
 4121, 4122, 4123, 4124, 4125, 4126, 4127, 4128 and 4129, act of June 23, 1931 (P.L.932,
 No.317), known as "The Third Class City Code," reenacted and amended June 28, 1951
 (P.L.662, No.164), absolutely.
 (5) Sections 1201-A, 1202-A, 1203-A, 1204-A, 1205-A, 1206-A, 1207-A, 1208-A, 1907.1, 1907.2,
 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2051, 2052, 2053, 2054,
 2055, 2056 and 2057, act of May 1, 1933 (P.L.103, No.69), known as "The Second Class
 Township Code," reenacted and amended July 10, 1947 (P.L.1481, No.567), absolutely.
 (6) The act of April 18, 1945 (P.L.258, No.117), entitled "An act requiring cities, boroughs,
 towns and townships to notify adjacent political subdivisions of proposed streets,
 roads and highways leading into them," as to cities of the second class A and third
 class, boroughs, incorporated towns and townships of the first and second class.
 (7) Sections 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2020, 2021,
 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 2026, 2027, 2028, 2029, 2030, 2031, 2032, 2033, 2034, 2035,
 2036, 2037, 2038 and 2039, act of August 9, 1955 (P.L.323, No.130), known as "The
 County Code," absolutely.
 (8) Sections 2201 through 2211 and 2220 through 2239, act of July 28, 1953 (P.L.723, No.230),
 known as the "Second Class County Code," in so far as they relate to counties of the
 second class A.
 19680247u1202s
 Section 1202. General Repeal.--All other acts and parts of acts are repealed in so far as they are
 inconsistent herewith, but this act shall not repeal or modify any of the provisions
 of 66 Pa.C.S. Pt. I (relating to public utility code), 68 Pa.C.S. Pt. II Subpt. B
 (relating to condominiums) or any laws administered by the Department of Transportation
 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
 (1202 amended June 22, 2000, P.L.483, No.67)